
Dairy cattle breeds 
The common dairy cattle breeds include the following: 
  
The Friesian 
Purpose: Milk production 
Potential yield: 40-60 litres milk/day 
Average body size: Large (500-550kg) 
Description: Black and white short haired coat, short horns 
 
Advantages:  
High milk production potential with low butter fat content of about 3.2% 
Note: Milk production will depend on level of feeding and other management.  
 
Disadvantages:  
Heavy feeder (requirements high (90-110Kg fresh forage/day) 
Susceptible to diseases, susceptible to milk fever 
Susceptible to high temperatures  
Large amounts of water (min 60 lts/day, more for heavy yielders) 

The Ayrshire 
Purpose: Milk production. Ayrshire milk is referred to as "the ideal drinking milk"; it 
is not excessively rich, not lacking adequate fat, and it possesses desirable 
quantities of proteins. 
Potential yield: 30 litres/day  
Average body size: Large (average live-weight 450kg) 
Description: Body colour: Brown and white patches in almost equal amounts with 
some cows tending to dark mahogany colour 
 
Advantages:  
High milk production potential (30 litre/day). The average milk yield from this 
breed in Kenya is roughly 3,000 litres in 305 days with high butter fat The 
cow's milk has moderate butter fat content 4.0% 
Fairly hardy and adaptable to varied climatic zones. 
They are relatively resistant to diseases.   
 
Disadvantages:  
Feed requirements high (90-110 kg fresh forage/day) 
Need plenty of clean water (60 litres/day)

The Guernsey 
Purpose: Milk production. Heifers generally come into milk at about two years of age. 
Average body size: Medium (average live-weight 400kg).The cow weighs 450 to 500 kg.
Description: 
The colour varies from yellow to reddish-brown with white patches. 
They have a finely tuned temperament, not nervous or irritable. 
Physically the breed has good dairy conformation and presents the visual 
impression of a plain animal bred for utility rather than good looks. 
They have an attractive carriage with a graceful walk, a strong back, broad 
loin, wide rump and deep barrel, strong, attached udder extending well 
forward, with the quarters evenly balanced and symmetrical. 
The Guernsey bull has an attractive individuality, revealing ample vigour and 
masculinity. It has smooth-blending shoulders showing good refinement, 
strength and even contour. 
 
Advantages: 
High milk production potential (25 lt/day).2. Milk has moderate butter fat content 4.3% 
Feed requirements: Moderate (65-85Kg fresh forage/day) 
Guernsey are efficient converters of feed to product, being of intermediate 
size, Guernsey produce their high quality milk while consuming 20 to 30 
percent less feed per pound of milk produced than larger dairy breeds  
Guernsey reaches reproductive maturity at an early age and can calve at 22 
months of age. This provides an early return on investment 
Guernsey are well known for having the minimum of calving complications 
Guernsey are adaptable to all climates and management systems and lack 
any known undesirable genetic recessives. 
 
The Jersey 
Purpose: Milk production. 
Average yield: 22 litres/day and about 5.3% butter fat. 
Average body size: Small - medium (350 Kg) 
Description:
Jerseys in Kenya are typically light brown in colour, though this can range 
from being almost grey to dull black. They can also have white patches which 
may cover much of the animal. A true Jersey will however always have a 
black nose bordered by an almost white muzzle.
They have protruding eyes.
This breed is well known for milk with high quality - it is particularly richer in 
protein, minerals and trace elements than those from the larger dairy breeds. 
The milk is also rich in colour which is naturally produced from carotene. 
Milk production potential is moderate (20 Lt/day), depending on feeding and 
management regime. 
 
Advantages: 
Feed requirements is relatively low (65-85 Kg fresh forage/) 
Milk has high butter fat content 5.2% 
It is hardy and adaptable to varied climatic zones 
The Jersey's hard black feet are much less prone to lameness 
They perform well under a wide range of systems and are well-known for their 
high feed conversion efficiency 
Jerseys generally produce milk components at a lower cost compared to the 
other major breeds 
They stay in the herd longer than any other dairy breed. Their milk has greater 
nutritional value, plus the highest yield and greater efficiency when processed 
into cheese and other value-added products 
The breed has little or no calving problems, greater fertility, a shorter calving 
interval, and earlier maturity 
Susceptible to milk fever and tick borne diseases 
 
CALF REARING 
Introduction 
The calf is the foundation of the future dairy herd which signifies the importance of 
proper calf rearing. Selection of replacements for culled cows can only be effective if 
good replacement heifers are available and in enough numbers to allow for a more 
rigid selection.  A good feeding and management programme will result in lower death 
rate (mortality), replacement heifers that start production early and fast  growth 
resulting in rapid genetic improvement. 
 
Management before birth 
As calf management begins before birth, a few days before the calf is born, the 
pregnant cow is transferred to a maternity paddock, which should be near the 
homestead (for closer observation), well watered and free from physical objects. The 
signs of imminent parturition (calving) include filling of udder with milk and is turgid, 
vulva swollen with a string of mucus hanging from vagina. Insemination records can 
also be used to estimate the expected calving date. 
 
Management at calving 
After the calf is born, ensure that calf is breathing. Should breathing not commence, 
the calf should be assisted (remove mucus from nostrils and if breathing does not start 
hold calf by hind legs upside down and swing several times). The umbilical cord 
should be disinfected using disinfectant (iodine or copper sulphate solution). If the calf 
is unable to suckle, it should be assisted and be allowed to suckle colostrum from the 
dam at will during the first week.  Any excess colostrum should be milked and stored 
or fed fresh to other calves. During the second week of life and thereafter, the calf 
should be separated from dam and fed by hand. 
 
Feeding of the calf  
The primary concern in rearing the newborn calf is to ensure it remains healthy. 
Feeding management should also be directed at addressing nutrient requirements 
and encouraging rumen development. 
 
While designing a calf feeding program, the aim should be to reduce mortality 
(death) rate while maintaining a growth rate of about 400-500g/day. The growth rate 
will vary with breeds, for the bigger breeds the aim should be to wean calves at 3 
months at approximately 80kg body weight. 
 
 
Phases of Calf Feeding 
The aim should be to switch young calves to cheaper feeds as early as possible 
so that more milk can be available for sale. However, the diet must be able to 
promote health and growth. 
 
Calf Feeding Programs 
1 While developing a calf feeding program the following factors should be considered. 
1. 
The calf has low immunity at birth and therefore must be given colostrum. The 
colostrum has antibodies that protect the calf against diseases the mother has 
been exposed to and their absorption is highest within 12 hrs after birth and 
very low after 24 hr. As such the calf must suckle colostrum immediately after 
birth and if necessary it should be given using a nipple bottle. The calf 
depends on the colostrum antibodies for about 2 weeks when it develops its 
own immunity. If new animals are introduced into the herd just before calving, 
it may be necessary to vaccinate them against the common diseases so that 
they can develop antibodies and pass then on to their new born. 
2. 
The newborn calf is dependent on milk for nutrition and growth in its early life 
as the rumen is not functional. The suckling reflex forms a fold (groove) which 
serves as a pipe for delivering milk straight from the oesophagus to 
abomasum  in young calves (bypassing fore- stomachs). Therefore, young 
calves should only be fed on liquid diets as the groove will not allow solids to 
pass. 
3. 
Calves secrete high amounts of lactase enzyme (breaks down lactose in milk 
to glucose and galactose to supply energy). The other carbohydrate digesting 
enzymes are low and therefore, milk which has a high lactose level should be 
fed to the calves. During formulation of milk replacers, the energy source 
should be milk lactose. Calves have no sucrase enzyme, and should not be 
fed on sucrose (ordinary sugar). 
4. 
Since the rumen is not functional, the calf cannot synthesize the B vitamins 
and they must be supplied in the diet. The diet of the newborn calf should 
contain milk proteins since enzymes to break down complex proteins do not 
develop until 7-10 days after birth. 
Phase 
Feed 
Colostrum phase (1 - 4 days) 
Colostrum 
Pre-ruminant phase (5 days to 20 - 30 days) 
Milk 
Transition stage (Liquids & dry feeds) 
Milk replacer and calf starter 
Post-weaning stage (dry feeds) 
Calf starter 
Introduce calf to solid feed 
As calf is introduced to solid feed, the rumen starts developing and the calf can be 
weaned as soon as it can consume enough dry feed (1.5% of body weight). It should 
be noted that dry feed should be introduced early, as solid feed is required for rumen 
development. Grain based diets promote faster growth of rumen papillae (which 
promotes rumen function) compared to roughages.  
 
Calf Feeding Methods  
After the first week during which the calf is left with the dam, several methods can be 
used for feeding depending on ease and convenience. 
 
1. Single suckling 
The calf is separated with the mother but during milking it is brought to to suckle. The 
amount of milk the calf consumes is difficult to quantify. Some farmers will allow the 
calf to suckle one quarter. This method is rarely used in commercial dairies. The 
disadvantage is that if the calf is not present, then the cow may not let down all the 
milk. This method is the best in terms of hygiene as the calf gets clean milk at body 
temperature. 
 
2. Foster mother or multiple suckling 
In farms where several cows give birth at the same time, one cow can be assigned to 
a number of calves depending on milk production. The calves suckle in turns ensuring 
that each calf only suckles the designated quarter. This method is not practical in small 
scale farms.
Nipple suckling 
A plastic nipple is attached to a clean bottle filled with milk and the calf is trained on 
how to suckle. An alternative is to attach a nipple on a short plastic hose pipe and 
insert the same into a bucket. The calf is then trained on how to suckle. 
 
Bottle feeding 
The milk is placed in a clean bottle and the calf is fed directly from the bottle. This 
method is tedious and slow if many calves are to be fed. There is a high likelihood of 
milk going to the lungs via trachea. 
 
This is the most commonly used method and milk is placed into a bucket and the calf 
is trained to drink (place finger in the milk and as calf suckles your finger it takes in 
milk). Stainless steel buckets, where available, should be used for hygienic reasons as 
plastic buckets are difficult to clean. 
Whatever method is used, clean equipment should be used at all times. Sick calves 
should always be fed last to minimize cross contamination. Attempts should be made 
to feed milk at body temperature especially during the cold season. 
 
Feeding during first week 
Calves should be allowed to suckle obtain colostrum from their dams. If mother dies at 
calving or is unable to produce milk due to some condition, artificial or frozen 
colostrum or a contemporary mother (one that has given birth at the same time) can 
be used. 
 
Artificial colostrum 
Colostrum serves two functions in new born calves, as a source of antibodies and also 
a rich source of nutrients (has high amount of energy and protein compared to milk).  

Artificial colostrum does not supply the antibodies but is a good source of nutrients for 
new born calf, e.g. composition of artificial colostrum: one egg (protein source) + half 
litre fresh warm water + half litre whole milk (source of lactose and milk protein) + one 
teaspoonful castor oil (energy) + one teaspoonful of cod liver oil (energy). 
 
Feeding during 2nd week to one month: 
Calves should be fed milk at approximately 10% of their body weight. Milk can be 
mixed with other dairy products (whey or skim milk) at this stage and should be fed at 
body temperature.  
 
Commercial milk replacers can be fed at this stage if they are available and cheaper 
as they would result in increased profits to the farmer and increase milk for human 
consumption. 
 
The milk replacer should contain 22% protein (if all protein is from milk sources) or 
24% when some plant protein is included (on DM basis). Mastitic milk can be fed to 
calves only if it appears normal and has low levels of antibiotics. The calf should be 
introduced to high quality pre-starters at this time. 
 
Calf feeds 
Preserved colostrum 
High yielding cows may produce more colostrum than the calf can consume which can 
be preserved and fed later. The colostrum can be preserved by several methods. The 
most ideal is freezing but this may not be possible in small-scale farms without 
electricity supply.  In such cases, the colostrums may be preserved through natural 
fermentation (storing at room temperature). Before feeding the preserved colostrum, it 
should be mixed with warm water at the ratio of 2 parts colostrum to 1 part water. 
 
Milk replacers 
These are commercial products manufactured to resemble milk and are mostly used 
when there is no milk to feed the calf e.g where a cow is sick or died during calving. 
They are also used when demand and price of milk is high. Preserved colostrum 
should be used as much as possible before a farmer decides to use milk replacer. Milk 
replacers are always of lower quality than whole milk and should only be fed if they are 
cheaper. 
 
Pre-starter 
A pre-starter is a high quality calf feed, which should be low in fibre and is almost 
similar to milk replacer and is usually fed during the second and third week. It is fed in 
12 
a dry pelleted form or as a meal. It should be used early to stimulate calves to eat dry 
feed to enhance rumen development. It is estimated that it takes rumen growth about 
three weeks after the calf starts eating a handful of dry feed, thus the earlier they start 
the better. 
 
Calf starter 
The starter contains slightly higher fibre content compared with the pre-starter. At this 
stage the calf is consuming little milk and is in transition to becoming a ruminant.  
 
 Roughage 
Calves should be offered only high quality forages early in life and supplemented with 
concentrates (calf starter). If hay is used, it should be of high quality, fine texture, 
mixed with legumes and fed ad lib. If they are on pasture, it would be best to always 
graze calves ahead of adults to control parasites. Some of the common roughages 
offered to calves are sweet potato vines and freshly harvested and wilted Lucerne. 
 
Water 
Calves should be offered fresh water in addition to milk. Lack of drinking water 
slows down digestion and development of the rumen, and hence the longer it takes 
before calves can be safely weaned. 
Between three weeks and weaning, calves’ water consumption usually increases 
and should be available all the time. 
This programme should result in growth rate of approximately 400-500 grams per 
day. 
 
Weaning 
Weaning is the withdrawal of milk or milk replacer and the calf becomes fully 
dependant on other feeds. Traditionally, most dairy calves are weaned based on 
age, 12 weeks being the most common. Early weaning is possible if more milk is fed 
and calves introduced to pre-starter and starter early in life.  
Age of calf (days) 

To minimise stress, weaning should be done gradually. The twice a day milk feeding 
should be reduced to once a day then to once every other day to allow the calf's 
digestive system to adjust to the new diet. 
 
Criteria that have been used to determine weaning time include when calf attains 
twice the birth weight, when the calf can consume 1.5% of its bodyweight of dry feed 
and age of calf.   
 
Early weaning (5 to <8 weeks) may be adopted to reduce the milk feeding period 
and labour required for calf rearing. This will require a specific feeding program 
using low levels of milk and high energy, high protein concentrates, preferably 
pelleted to stimulate rumen development. Liquid milk or milk replacer is reduced 
from 3 weeks of age to encourage the calf to consume and maximize intake of dry 
feeds.  
 
Calf Housing 
 Housing of calves is an important aspect of calf management. Claves are housed for 
several reasons, the most important being protection from adverse weather conditions 
and predators, avoid internal and external parasites and control feeding and 
management. 
 
A calf pen should be constructed where possible from locally available materials. It 
should be constructed to: 
i allow approximately 2 m2  (1.2 X 1.5m) space per calf 
ii be well drained or bedded 
iii be well lighted (artificial or natural). 
iv be well ventilated 
v strong to stand predator invasion. 
 
Calves can be housed permanently indoor until weaning time when they are turned to 
pasture or semi-indoor where they housed only at night. 
The calf house can be permanent or temporary and movable. Permanent houses 
should be constructed such that they are easy to clean when a new calf is introduced. 
Temporary houses are moved from one location to another when new calf moves in. 
 
Design: 
A calf house floor can be on ground level or raised. If at ground level, the floor should 
be made of easily cleanable material (e.g. concrete) and should be bedded using 
straw. The sides can be made of concrete or wooden. The raised pens should have a 
14 
slatted floor. They are made of timber spaced at 1 inch to allow urine and faeces to fall 
on the ground. The house should be at least 1 foot from the ground.  

In big dairies, calves can be housed individually or in groups. Individual housing is 
recommended during the first one month. When not possible then group housing can 
be done though there are several disadvantages including: 
1. Difficulty in feeding and management. 
2. Disease control is difficult. 
3. Fights among calves - decreased growth rate. 
4. Calves suckling each other which could lead to ingested hair (tend to form hair 
balls), blind teats and removal of disinfectant from umbilical cord. 

Raised calf pen: Suitable for newborn calves. This type of calf pen is suitable for a 
zero-grazing unit. It is placed inside the roofed and walled section of the unit. It may 
be permanent or movable.
Individual pens for calves from birth to 2 to 3 months of age are often built with an 
elevated slatted floor. This floor will ensure that the calf is always dry and clean.  
 
The required minimum internal dimensions for an individual calf pen are 1200 by 
800mm for a pen where the calf is kept up to two weeks of age, 1200 by l000mm 
where the calf is kept to 6 to 8 weeks of age and 1500 by 1 200mm where the calf is 
kept from 6 to 14 weeks of age. Three sides of the pens should be tight to prevent 
contact with other calves and to prevent draughts. Draughts through the slatted floor 
may be prevented by covering the floor with litter until the calf is at least one month 
of age.  
 
The front of the pen should be made so that the calf can be fed milk, concentrates 
and water easily from buckets or a trough fixed to the outside of the pen and so that 
the calf can be moved out of the pen without lifting.  
 
General management Practices 

Castration 
Male calves are castrated to prevent unwanted mating where male and female 
cattle are reared together in one herd. In addition, castrated males are easier to 
handle and they produce better quality meat.   
 
Castration can be done by using an elastrator ring, burdizzo or open castration 
using a knife. 
 
Knife castration: is the only completely safe method to sterilize male animals and 
can be done at any age by a qualified veterinarian. With this method of castration 
there is always a danger that the wound can become infected and the necessary 
precautions must be taken. 
 
Elastrator rings: The rubber ring is applied around the neck of the scrotal sack 
using the special instrument designed for this purpose. The testicles must be in 
the scrotal sack distal (away from the body of the calf) to the elastrator ring. To 
minimize pain when using the rubber ring method of castration, they must be 
applied within three days of birth. 
 
A strong rubber ring is placed around the top of the testicles thus cutting off blood 
supply. The testicles die off slowly. 
 
The burdizzo: This is an instrument used to cut off the blood supply to the testicles, 
causing cell death of the testicular tissues resulting in degeneration of the testicles. 
The best time to apply the burdizzo is three to four weeks after birth when the 
spermatic cords can be felt.  
 
The burdizzo is applied to each spermatic cord separately (Figure) in such a way 
that the blood supply to the testicles is damaged, while circulation to the scrotal 
sack remains intact. Gangrene can set in where blood circulation to the scrotum is 
lost. To achieve these objectives, the burdizzo is applied to the individual spermatic 
cords at opposite sides of the scrotum, leaving a central area free for blood to 
circulate or applying the burdizzo at different levels on opposite sides of the 
scrotum.  
 
The equipment is used to clamp and crush the top of the testicles 

Dehorning 
Horned cows are not only dangerous to people working with them, but cause a great 
deal of damage to hides. Dehorning also improves the animal looks. 
 
Dehorning can be done by several methods.  

Hot iron: Electric, gas or fire-heated iron is the most common in calves (4 to 6 
weeks). When using this method, ensure that the killing of horn bud is effective 
otherwise the horn will grow again. Hot iron dehorning can be done with ease up to 
the age 3 months (while the dehorning iron still fits over the bud comfortably), 
thereafter horn growth is fairly rapid, making surgical removal necessary.  
 
Surgical method: use of saw or cutting wire: In older animals, surgical procedures 
must be used, especially if horns have grown to a length of 2 cm or more.  
The removal of larger horns causes a great deal of pain and anaesthetics should be 
used with dehorning and steps taken to prevent bleeding. Blood attracts flies and 
blow-fly strike causes serious problems in open wounds. Once horns have grown 
very large, removal of the horns exposes the hollows in the skull and these must be 
closed to prevent infection.  
 
Identification 
Identification of calves should be done immediately after birth to allow efficient and 
proper recording. Identification can be through various methods: 
 
Branding 
Hot iron - brand for a short time on the legs so as not to spoil skin. This is permanent 
but not common in dairy cattle.
Ear marking a) ear notching - cut part of ear using an agreed code. This mark is permanent but exposes cow to infection. 
b) ear tattooing - difficult to read and does not work in dark animals. 
c) ear tagging  - use an applicator,   easy to read but expensive.  
 
Calf health  
Most of the common health problems experienced by calves are due to poor 
management. Diligent feeding management and housing is therefore essential to 
ensure calf health is maintained. Some of the common problems associated with 
management practices are diarrhoea and pneumonia 
 
Common Diseases 
Scours (diarrhoea) 
Scours could be caused by nutritional disorders, viruses or bacteria. Digestive upsets 
leading to scours are a major cause of death in young calves. The problem can 
however be minimised through:  
i) 
Ensuring calves receive adequate colostrum within 6 hours of birth and 
therefore acquire some natural immunity.  
ii) 
Feeding the correct amount of milk. 
iii) 
Early recognition, isolation and treatment of scouring calves  
iv) Maintenance of hygiene and cleanliness of feeding utensils and the 
environment  
v) 
Not rearing calves continually in pens, dirt yards or small paddocks that 
become heavily contaminated. Paddock rotation will help prevent disease.  
vi) Separation of sick animals to avoid cross infection.  
Close observation of calves at feeding to identify scouring animals as soon as 
possible for remedial treatment will prevent dehydration and secondary disease 
leading to chronic ill-thrift and mortality.  
Ear notching 
Ear tattooing 
Ear tagging 
• 
Most scour incidents can be treated simply by: 
• 
 Feeding water with salts.   
• 
Avoiding milk for 1-2 feeds. Give fresh water, concentrates and forage.  
 
Antibiotics should not be used to treat scours resulting from over feeding or 
digestive upsets. Blood scours (mostly caused by coccidia) require veterinary 
treatment and management changes to improve hygiene. 
 
Pneumonia 
One cause of pneumonia in young calves is fluids going to the lungs via the 
windpipe (trachea). The first feeding of colostrum can cause problems if the feeding 
rate is faster than swallowing rate. If colostrum is bottle fed it is important to use a 
nipple that matches the calf’s ability to swallow.  
 
Greedy calves swallow large quantities of milk from the bucket, some of which may 
end up in the windpipe leading to pneumonia. 

HEIFER REARING 
Introduction 
Raising dairy heifers begins with choice of a bull likely to produce animals with high 
genetic potential for milk.  A well managed dairy farm should have as many calves 
born every year as there are cows in the herd. Most farmers sell males calves at an 
early age while the females are reared as dairy replacement heifers for the herd or as 
heifers for sale.  Raising a high number of replacement heifers allows a dairy farmer 
to: 
i) 
Obtain the best replacement heifers through strict selection criteria from 
wide selection. 
ii) 
Expand the dairy herd at low cost (without buying heifers or cows) 
iii) 
Sell excess heifers to earn income. 
 
Heifers represent the future of the herd. At the same time, they are non-productive 
animals incurring expenditure in terms of feed, labour and veterinary services 
without immediate returns. Raising heifers is a financial investment that begins to 
bring dividends after the first calving; therefore the goal should be to make ensure 
proper growth rate at minimum costs to be inseminated on time in order to realize 
full lactation potential later in life.  
 
Feeding 
Heifer raising is the second largest expenditure in a farm after the milking herd, with 
feed costs takes the largest share. The aim should be to rear heifers to reach the 
desired body weight early so that they initiate puberty, establish pregnancy, and calve 
easily. When feeding heifers, the farmer should aim to: 
i) 
Reduce interval between weaning and first lactation. This will increase 
number of calvings per lifetime (more of lactations) and lead to faster 
genetic improvement. 
ii) 
Minimise mortality. 
iii) 
Achieve a growth rate of 0.5-0.7 kg/d. 
iv) Achieve first calving at 22 to 24 months of age 
v) 
Feeding management must ensure that heifers reach target live weights 
for breeding at 14-16 months of age. 
 
Combining both adequate development and early age at calving has several 
advantages: 
i) 
It decreases the risk of calving difficulty. 
ii) 
It improves lifetime milk production (days in lactation and milk production 
per day in lactation). 
iii) 
It reduces rearing costs (feed, labour, etc.); 
iv) 
It decreases total number of heifers needed to maintain herd size. 
22 
In most farms, heifers are normally the most neglected group in terms of feeding 
resulting in delayed calving. When heifers are fed as a group, the main problem 
becomes that the heifers are normally of different ages and thus aggressiveness 
varies. When concentrate is fed to the group, the young and weak consume less 
compared to others. In pasture management systems, close supervision is required 
due to variation in pasture quality through the seasons which may affect heifer 
growth rates. 
 
Heifers can be reared on good quality pasture only as their nutrient requirements 
are low (growth and maintenance). Supplementation with concentrate should be at 
1% of body weight. Generally the amount of concentrate given to heifers should be 
1 to 4 kg depending on age (size) of the heifer and forage quality. Mineral salt 
supplement is recommended on a free-choice basis. 
 
While designing a feeding program for heifers, the following should be considered: 
i) 
Puberty (thus calving) is related to size (feeding) rather than age. The 
consequences of poor feeding are manifested in delayed calving resulting 
in delayed milk production. 
ii) 
Feeding heifers too much energy leads to deposition of fat in mammary 
gland tissue displacing secretory tissue resulting in reduced milk yield. 
The key period in mammary gland development is between 3 and 9 
months of age. During this period, mammary tissue is growing 3.5 times 
faster than body tissue. Heifers fed high-concentrate rations develop less 
milk secretory tissue in the mammary gland than heifers raised on 
recommended rations. 
iii) 
Underfeeding heifers results in small bodied heifers which experience 
dystocia (difficult calving). 
iv) Heifers calving at 24 months have a higher lactational milk yield 
compared to calving at an older age.  
v) 
Size of animal is related to milk yield. For twins of same genetic makeup, 
the heavier one produces extra milk in a lactation. 
 
Growth rate (weight) versus age 
Both under- and over-feeding heifers are undesirable during heifer rearing. 
Overfeeding may result in obesity, low conception rate, difficult calving and low milk 
production while underfeeding will result in low conception rate, poor fetal growth, 
difficult calving and low first lactation milk yield. It is therefore important to monitor 
performance of heifers, particularly the body weight change and height at withers.  
23 
Growth should be such that increase in weight is accompanied by a proportionate 
change in height. Growth charts allow a farmer to compare the height and weight of 
heifers to a standard curve that represents the average for the particular breed.  
This  tool enables the farmer to monitor heifer performance to determine whether 
feeding and other management practices are adequate.  
 
Body weight and height at withers are three important measurements used to 
evaluate heifer growth. The weight is estimated with a weigh band and height by 
graduated piece of timber as shown in the picture below. 
 
Once the measurements are taken, they are then fitted into a growth chart which is 
breed specific (eg below). If the body weight falls below the band (expected), then 
the heifer not getting enough nutrients (energy) and vise-versa. Short heifers are an 
indication of low protein in the diet. 

Breeding 
Regardless of age, puberty is reached when a heifer weighs approximately 40% of 
her mature body weight. Breeding however, is recommended when a heifer has 
reached 60% of her expected mature body weight. This is normally achieved when 
the heifer is 14 to 16 months old. Smaller breeds may be bred one or two months 
earlier than large breeds because they mature faster. Heifers in good condition and 
gaining weight at breeding time generally show more definite signs of estrus and 
have improved conception rates over heifers in poor condition and/or losing weight. 
Over-conditioned or fat heifers have been reported to require more services per 
conception than heifers of normal size and weight. The table below gives a guide on 
when to breed heifers: 
 
Steaming up 
Once heifers are pregnant, feeding should be adequate to ensure proper development 
to avoid calving problems and poor first-lactation yield. Pregnant heifers may be 
maintained on good quality forage alone but concentrates should be given if the forage 
is of low quality.  
Table 3. Recommended age and size for breeding and calving for different dairy breeds 
Breeding 
Calving 
Breed 
Age in 
Months 
Size in kg 
Height in cm 
Age in 
Months 
Size in kg 
Jersey 
12-14 
230-275 
112 
21-23 
350-375 
Guernsey 
14-16 
290-320 
120 
23-25 
375-400 
Ayrshire 
14-16 
320-350 
120 
23-25 
420-450 
Friesian 
14-16 
320-350 
125 
23-25 
420-450 
NB: There is a tremendous increase in weight during the 9 month. This is due to heifer growth and foetal weight 
Fig. 14: Heifer growth chart 
25 
During the last two months of pregnancy, the feeding regime can affect milk production 
during the first lactation. The exact amount of concentrates to feed before calving will 
depend on forage quality, size, and condition of the heifer. A rule of thumb the heifer 
should be fed concentrate at 1 percent of body weight starting about 6 weeks before 
calving with a ration balanced in protein, minerals, and vitamins.  
 
Feeding concentrates allows the rumen bacteria to get used to digesting high levels of 
concentrate, which is very important during early lactation. If practical, concentrates 
should be fed in a milking parlour as this accustoms the heifer to the milking parlour. 
Well managed heifers will have a minimum of problems at calving, but ease of calving 
can be affected by plane of nutrition in two ways: 
i) 
an effect on calf size, and  
ii) 
an effect on fatness of the dam.  
 
Fat heifers have higher rates of difficult calving because of small pelvic openings and 
usually a larger-than-normal sized calf at birth. Underfed or poorly grown heifers also 
will require more assistance at calving and have a higher death rate at calving than 
normal sized heifers. 
 
Housing 
When considering housing for heifers, the following factors need to be considered: 
• 
Convenience of feeding: Feeding from outside the house is desirable as it 
minimizes stress and risk of injuries. 
• 
Cleanliness of the sleeping area: It should be easy to remove bedding or clean 
the sleeping area. 
• 
Convenience of moving and restraining animals: Heifers go through 
management practices such as vaccination, dehorning, deworming, weighing, 
artificial insemination and they require restraint. The housing facility should meet 
the animal’s requirements but also make it easy to handle them. 
   
From weaning to five months, the young heifers may be housed in small groups of four 
to five. However, the house should be sheltered, clean, have dry bedding, good 
ventilation and easy access to water and feed. For zero-grazing systems, the heifers 
may be housed in the same unit with the mature cows, but in a separate cubical fitted 
with feed and water trough. If they are to be housed in a separate unit, a free stall may 
be used but it should include outside lots for exercise and feeding. 
 
From the sixth month, heifers may can be kept in paddocks in the pastures but 
watched regularly. Shelter and fenced area must be constructed to ease animal 
handling and restraint but the degree of protection needed will depend on weather 
26 
conditions. Facilities for feeding supplemental feeds and minerals must also be 
provided. 
 
Health management 
Raising healthy heifers is important in all dairy production systems as health affects 
growth rate, fertility and hence age at first calving and milk production. Losses are also 
incurred in form of veterinary costs and death limiting the opportunity for selection of 
high quality animals and or sales. Most of the common diseases affecting calves are 
also important in heifer rearing and have been dealt with in the previous chapter.   
 
27 
CHAPTER 4: FEEDING AND MANAGEMENT OF DAIRY COWS 
 
Introduction 
The dairy cow is like a as a machine that converts raw materials (feed and water) into 
milk. The raw materials are mainly plant materials which are not edible by humans but 
the cow is able to convert into high quality human food. 
 
Qualities of a good dairy cow 
 
Though milk production may not be 100% related with external appearance of a 
dairy cow, there are some physical features related to milk yield and the longevity 
(length of time animal is productive) of the animal in the herd. These features (Table 
4) are commonly used in judging the suitability of a dairy cow from its external 
appearance. These characteristics should be considered by a farmer while buying, 
selling or selecting a replacement for dairy animals. 
 
Cow as a milk factory 
A dairy cow can be compared with a factory. The raw materials that go into milk 
manufacturing are the feeds consumed by the cow. To get more milk, feed the cow 
on good quality feed in large quantities. The size of the factory can be compared to 
the size of the cow where a large factory will hold more raw materials, so will a large 
cow have a larger rumen. 
28 
Feed is converted into milk by the digestive system (stomachs and intestines) and 
the mammary gland. All cows can be assumed to have a similar digestive system 
but the capacity of the mammary gland will vary depending on size of udder and 
number of milk making units (alveolar cells) which are determined by the genetics of 
the cow. A conducive environment is required for them to function (the cow must be 
comfortable and free from pain), just like the workers in a factory 
 
Feeding  
The aim of feeding of dairy cows is to maximize milk yield (by meeting cow's feed 
requirements) and to maintain the cow in good health.  
  
Character 
Description 
Desired 
Size 
Size 
  
Stature (height in cm at 
rump or withers) 
Jersey=120, Guernsey=125, Ayr-
shire=130, Friesian=135 
Chest width 
  
Distance between the 
two front legs 
Should be large to give room for the 
heart and lungs 
Rump width 
Distance between the 
pin bones 
Should be big to ease calving and allow 
wide rear udder attachment. 
Dairy 
Character 
  
Angularity 
Body Frame 
Dairy type 
  
Reflects the appearance 
that the cow has the will 
to milk. 
  
Rib structure: ribs wide apart, rib bones 
wide, flat and long and free from excess 
flesh. 
Neck: long, lean and blending smoothly 
into shoulders 
Barrel: width tending to increase to-
wards rear. 
Rump Angle 
(pelvic angle) 
  
Angle from hooks to pins. Pins should be slightly lower than hooks 
(about 1 inch). Improper angle can hin-
der reproductive performance and mo-
bility. 
Top line 
(backline) 
Level of backbone from 
shoulders to pelvis 
Should be strong and level. 
Udder 
Fore udder at-
tachment 
  
Fore udder attachment 
Attachment of fore udder to trunk should 
be almost level. 
Udder depth 
  
Distance between bot-
tom of udder and ground 
in relation to height. 
Should be shallow and above the hock. 
Deep udder is prone to injury. Consider 
age and stage of lactation. 
Rear udder 
height 
Distance between the 
vulva and udder fold 
Should be attached high. 
  
Udder suspen-
sion 
Udder cleft - suspensory 
ligament. 
Should be clearly visible and continue 
upwards. Should be strong to keep ud-
der firm and prevent teats from pointing 
outwards 
Teat placement 
  
Direction of teats 
Should point straight down or slightly 
inwards (for ease of milking) 
Teat length 
  
  
5cm ideal is for machine milking, but 
slightly longer for hand milking. 
Legs and 
Feet 
  
Rear leg set 
Angle at hock viewed 
from side should not be 
straight. 
Ideally, pin bone, hock and dew claw 
should be in one line. 
Should be straight from the rear. 
Hoof diagonal 
Distance between point 
of toe and top of heel. 
Intermediate desirable. 
  
Table 4. Characteristics used in judging dairy cattle  
29 
Nutritional requirements 
Proper feeding is essential to ensure animals receive adequate nutrients for 
maintenance and production, and remain healthy and in good body condition. Dairy 
cattle must eat a balanced diet. Too little (or poor-quality feed) results in thin 
animals that cannot resist disease while giving too much feed is wasteful and does 
not make economic sense. Lack of essential nutrients will result in ill-health, failure 
to reach full production potential and sometimes death. For cattle, the basic types of 
ingredients needed are shown in Table 5 below. 
 
• 
 Macro ingredients. Energy supplies the body’s fuel allowing the animal to 
move, keep warm, stay alive and be productive. Energy feeds are the main 
part of the diet. Protein helps young animals to grow and develop strong 
muscles and enables cows to produce healthy calves and adequate milk. 
• 
Micro ingredients. Minerals and vitamins are required in small amounts and 
fulfil a variety of functions, including forming strong bones and maintaining the 
reproductive system. 
 
Nutrient requirements 
A dairy cow, like all other animals requires energy, protein, minerals and vitamins 
which must be provided in the diet. 
 
Table 5. Feeds supplying different types of nutrients 
Type of nutrients 
Cattle diets 
Energy 
Bulk forages and pastures – grass, hay, straw, stovers 
Cereal by-products (maize, maize bran and maize germ, Wheat, pollard, 
wheat bran, rice bran and rice polishing) 
Root crops – cassava chips 
Oil seed products 
Molasses 
Fat 
Protein 
Legume crops and forages – desmodium, sweet potato vines or callian-
dra leaves 
Plant by-products: Mostly from extracted oil seeds (cotton seed cake, sun-
flower cake, soybean cake), copra cake, groundnut cake 
Animal origin: Fish meal 
Non protein nitrogen sources (NPN):  Urea, poultry litter* 
Vitamins 
Vitamin supplements 
Made in rumen by micro-organisms 
Minerals 
Forages 
Mineral licks 
Salt 
*Poultry litter should be properly dried and sieved to minimise amount of sawdust. Non-protein sources are 
converted into protein by micro-organisms in the digestive system 
30 
Types of feed 
Balanced diets for cattle are made of the following: 
 
Bulk feeds 
Also known as basal feeds, these are fibrous plants known as forages and include 
grass, hay, straw and stovers (stems and leaves of tall cereals such as maize and 
sorghum). They provide most of the energy and bulk an animal needs and will make 
up most of the diet. Most contain only low or medium levels of protein. Forage forms 
up to 30-70% of the diet, depending on level of productivity. Using a feed trough helps 
to make forage accessible without wastage. 
 
Supplementary feeds 
These are feeds with a higher concentration of energy or protein or both, i.e. more 
nutrients per volume or weight of feed compared to forages. Certain forages (e.g. 
legumes), commercial dairy concentrates and cereal by-products are high in protein. 
They are fed in relatively small amounts together with the bulk feeds and are most 
often fed to productive animals such as lactating or pregnant cows. Protein feed 
should not exceed 30% of total feed since proteins cannot be stored in the body and 
will be In addition, extra energy is (which would otherwise be used for milk production) 
is used to remove the extra protein (nitrogen) from the body in form of urea in the urine. 
Minerals 
Dairy cattle require at least 17 minerals and three vitamins in their diet for optimal milk 
production, reproductive performance, and herd health. Although classical mineral or 
vitamin deficiency symptoms are rare, in many cases under- and overfeeding of 
certain minerals and vitamins does occur. 
 
 Even small imbalances or deficiencies can develop into reproductive, health, and milk 
production problems. As herd milk production increases, it becomes more critical to 
balance and fine-tune the dairy herd's mineral and vitamin feeding program. Generally, 
the two sources of minerals include natural feeds (forages and grains) and mineral 
supplements to balance the minerals present in the forages and grains. Minerals can 
be fed using several methods. 
 
Force Feeding: recommended way of feeding minerals to dairy cows as it eliminates 
Table 6. Recommended crude protein levels in dairy cattle diets 
Milk yield (kg/day) 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
% Crude protein in whole ration 
13 
15 
16 
17 
18 
31 
palatability problems, daily and cow-to-cow variation in intake, and over-
consumption of minerals. The optimal method of force-feeding is in a total mixed 
ration. Another commonly used method of force-feeding is use of a grain carrier. 
 
Free Choice: This method is not as accurate as force-feeding, and only trace-
mineralized salt should be fed free choice.  
 
Topdressing: This method is used often in stall fed cows where individual feeding 
practiced. 
 
 Vitamins 
Vitamins fall into two groups: fat soluble and water soluble. The water soluble 
vitamins are synthesized in the rumen thus only the fat soluble (A, D, E) are 
required in the diet. Vitamin K is not required in the ration because it is synthesized 
in the rumen.  
 
Water 
Although water is not a nutrient as such, it is essential for life.  Water can be 
obtained from feed and/or drinking. Lactating cows need larger proportions of water 
relative to body weight than most livestock species since 87% of milk is water. The 
amount required depends mainly on milk yield, water content of feed, amount of 
feed consumed, salt content of feed and the environmental temperature. Except for 
high moisture content, an increase in the other factors increases water requirement. 
Cows will drink more water if it is availed at all times and when warm water is 
offered on cold days. Dairy cows suffer from a limited intake of water more quickly 
and severely than from a deficiency of any other dietary nutrient. Lack of water has 
a big effect on feed intake (especially if the feed is low in moisture) and thus on milk 
yield. 
 
Balanced Ration 
During formulation of dairy cow rations, the daily requirements for all the above 
nutrients must be taken into consideration. The available feed resources should 
then be mixed to meet the cow's nutrient requirements, which are dependent on 
bodyweight, milk yield, reproductive (pregnancy) requirements and growth. 
A balanced ration will consist of combined feed ingredients which will be consumed 
in amounts needed to supply the daily nutrient requirements of the cow, both in 
correct proportion and amount. A ration will be balanced when all the required 
nutrients are present in feed eaten by the cow during a 24hr period. 
32 
Balancing a ration for animals that are not confined (grazing) is a difficult task since 
grazing animals can choose how much to graze and can select while grazing to 
improve the quality. Under these circumstances, amount of supplementation can 
only be estimated depending on quantity quality of the available pasture. 
 
When a ration is not balanced, the cow eats some nutrients in excess or in 
insufficient amounts. Some excesses and deficiencies, if not checked, can lead to 
death (eg calcium deficiency resulting in milk fever). However, some imbalances are 
difficult to identify because they result in some degree of loss thus not permitting the 
cow to exploit its genetic potential. 
 
A properly balanced ration will therefore be a mixture of all the ingredients. Total 
mixed ration (TMR) is a feeding method that helps achieve the mixing a balanced 
ration. 
 
Total Mixed Rations (TMR) 
TMR is defined as a mixture of all diet ingredients (roughage, concentrates, mineral 
supplements and additives) formulated to contain specific amount of nutrients, 
mixed thoroughly to prevent separation and fed at free will to the cow.  
 
To formulate a total mixed ration, the following information is required: 
Feeds (ingredients): Nutrient composition (can be obtained from laboratory analysis 
or estimated from text book values) and cost. 
 
Cow: Body weight, expected milk yield and estimated amount of feed the cow can 
consume in one day. This allows the formulator to ensure that all the required 
nutrients are included in the amount of feed that can be consumed in one day. 
The formulation should be done by a qualified person for the different groups of 
animals on the farm based on each group's requirements. As much as possible 
locally available feeds should be utilized. 
 
The TMR feeding regime has several advantages compared to feeding ingredients 
separately as cows are able to consume high amount of feed especially in early 
lactation when high intakes are helpful and increase milk yields. TMR also allows 
greater accuracy in ration formulation and energy and protein are used more 
efficiently by rumen bacteria resulting in higher production. 
 
Use of TMR improves milk fat test, minimises digestive upsets, eliminates need for 
33 
minerals supplements, allows use of less palatable ingredients and eliminates need 
for concentrate feeding at milking. 
 
For the implementation of a good TMR program, there will be need for weighing 
equipment, estimation of dry matter content of ingredients and a qualified nutritionist 
to formulate the ration. 
 
Practical feeding 
During the formulation of rations for lactating dairy cows, the quality of the ration 
should be commensurate with the requirements of the cow. The requirement is directly 
related to the milk yield, which is in turn dependent on the stage of lactation. As such, 
cows in early lactation will require more nutrients compared to those in late lactation.  
 
Since it is not practically possible to formulate a separate ration for each cow, the cows 
should be fed in groups (strings) with common nutrient requirements. Cows in the 
same stage of lactation will have almost similar requirements and can therefore the 
rations can be formulated according to the phase (stage) of lactation. 
 
Phase 1: (1-70 days) 
During this phase, milk production increases more rapidly than feed intake resulting 
in higher energy demand than intake leading to a negative energy balance. This 
results in mobilisation and use of body reserves and loss in body weight (negative 
energy). The energy is mobilised from fat reserves, protein from muscle and calcium 
and phosphorus from bones.  However, energy is most limiting.  
 
The health and nutrition of the cow during this phase is critical and affects the entire 
lactation performance.  The cow is expected to achieve peak production during this 
phase, failure to which the lactation milk yield is reduced. Excessive weight loss 
may be detrimental to cow's health and reproductive performance (cow may not 
come on heat at the optimum time) leading to long calving intervals.   
 
Concentrates should be added to the basal diet to increase the energy and protein 
content as forage alone will not be sufficient. Cows that are poorly fed during this 
early phase do not attain peak yield and milk production drops from week 1. 
 
If excessive concentrates are added too rapidly (non-accustomed cows) to the 
ration, they can lead to digestive disturbances (rumen acidosis, loss of appetite, 
reduced milk production, low milk fat content). It is therefore recommended that 
34 
concentrates should be limited to 50-60% of diet dry matter, the rest being forage to 
ensure rumination (proper function of the rumen). If high amounts of concentrate are 
fed during this time buffers (chemicals that reduce the acid in the rumen and 
available commercially) can be helpful.  
 
At this stage, high protein content is important since the body cannot mobilise all the 
needed protein and bacteria protein (synthesized in the rumen by bacteria) can only 
partially meet requirements. A ration with protein content of 18%CP is 
recommended for high yielding cows. If the cow is underfed during this stage, milk 
production cannot recover even when balanced rations are fed at later stages. This 
is attributed to the fact that cows in later stages of lactation use energy more 
efficiently to restore body reserves than for milk synthesis. It should be noted that 
cows come on first heat during this phase and regaining a positive energy balance 
is critical in achieving this. 
 
Phase 2: (70-150ds) 
During this phase the dry matter intake is adequate to support milk production and 
either maintain or slightly increase body weight. Feeding should be to maintain 
production peak as long as possible. Decline of 8-10%/month in milk production are 
common after peaking. The forage quality should still be high and a CP content of 
15-18%. Concentrates high in digestible fibre (rather than starch) e.g. wheat or 
maize bran can be used as energy source. 
 
Phase 3: (151-305ds) 
During this phase feed intake and milk production decline. The feed intake meets 
energy requirements for milk production, restoration of body reserves and body 
weight increases. The body weight increase is due to replenishment of body 
reserves and, towards the end of lactation, due to increased growth of foetus. It has 
been shown that it is more efficient to replenish body weight during late lactation 
than during the dry period. The animals can be fed on lower quality roughage and 
limited amounts of concentrate compared to the other two phases. 
 
Phase 4: (Dry Period: 305-365ds) 
During this phase the cow continues to gain weight primarily due to weight of foetus. 
Proper feeding of cow during this stage will help realise the cow's potential during 
next lactation and minimise health problems at calving time (milk fever and ketosis). 
At the time of drying, cows should be fed a ration to cater for maintenance and 
pregnancy but two weeks before calving, the cow should be fed on concentrates in 
preparation for next lactation.  
35 
This extra concentrate (steaming) enables the cow to store some reserves to be 
used in early lactation and to adapt rumen microbial population to digest 
concentrates in early lactation to minimise digestive disturbances. During this phase 
the cow can be fed good quality forage or poor quality supplemented with 
concentrate to provide 12% CP. The cows should not be fed high amounts of 
concentrate to avoid over conditioning. If the diet is rich in energy, intake should be 
limited. Bulky roughages can be fed to help increase rumen size to accommodate 
more feed at parturition. The amount of calcium and phosphorous fed should be 
restricted during the dry period to 0.4% and 0.25% to minimise incidences of milk 
fever. 
 
Guidelines for concentrate feeding 
There are several types of commercial concentrates available in the market for 
feeding dairy cows, the most common being 'Dairy Meal®'. Concentrates can also 
be home made using locally available ingredients. It should be noted that feedstuffs 
available in the market e.g. bran (wheat or maize), pollard or maize germ are not 
similar to the mixed concentrate as they are low in protein and minerals and should 
be used in combination with other ingredients when supplementing forages. 
 
The maximum amount of milk that can be produced without concentrate 
supplementation will depend on the quality of the pasture or forage. This has been 
reported to vary from 7-20 kg milk per day. 
 
Several guidelines have been suggested on the amount of concentrate that should 
be fed to a cow. The only accurate one is the one calculated based on the cow’s 
nutrient requirements and the quality of the basal diet by a nutritionist.   
The example below is one of the many guidelines.  
Guideline 1 
Friesian: 
Yield (kg/day) 
<18 
18-30 
>30 
  
Jersey/ Guernsey/ Ayrshire 
<13 
13-28 
>28 
  
  
kg milk/kg concentrate 
4:1 
3:1 
2.5:1 
  
  
3:1 
2.5:1 
2:1 
  
Up to 7 kg of milk comes from the basal forage diet 
For every extra 1.5 kg milk above 7 kg, give 1 kg dairy meal 
36 
Challenge feeding: 
The lactating cow is given increasing amounts of concentrate as long as it continues 
to respond by increased milk production (has been referred to as lead feeding as 
the cow is led to produce more milk). This can be recommended only if the extra 
milk produced can offset the added cost of the concentrate. 
 
Note: 
Since underfeeding in early lactation can result in reduced milk production 
throughout lactation and delayed coming on heat, it is advisable for farmers who 
have limited resources to buy concentrates to feed more in early lactation and none 
towards the end of lactation. 
 
Body Condition:  
Body conditioning of dairy cows can be used to assess the feeding regimes in dairy 
cattle.  
 
Body condition scoring can be carried out by the farmer through initial training and 
gets more accurate with experience. Several systems have been suggested but the 
1-5 scoring has been the most used. 
 
The animals are scored based on the protrusion of the hooks (tuber coxae) and the 
pins (tuber ischii) and the depression under the tail head (see figure and pictures 
below. 
Fig. 16: Hooks (tuber coxae) and pins (tuber ischii) protrusion in a cow 
37 
 
 
 
Body Condition Score 1 
Rump Area: Deep cavity around tail head. No 
fatty tissue felt between pins. Hooks are 
prominent. Pelvic bone easily felt. Skin is loose.  
 
Body Condition Score 2 
Rump Area: Shallow cavity lined with fatty 
tissue at tail head. Some fatty tissue felt under 
pin bone. Pelvis easily felt. 
High-producing, early lactation cows should 
score 2. 
 
 
Body Condition Score 3 
Rump Area: No visible cavity around tail head. 
Fatty tissue is easily felt over whole rump. Skin 
appears smooth. Pelvis is felt with slight 
pressure. Pins and hooks not prominent 
 
 
 
Body Condition Score 4 
Rump Area: Folds of fatty tissue are visible 
around tail head. Patches of fat are present 
around the pin bones. Pelvis is felt only with 
firm pressure. 
 
 
Body Condition Score 5 
Rump Area: Tail head is buried in fatty tissue. 
Skin is distended. No part of pelvis can be felt 
even with firm pressure. 
These cows can easily get the condition fat 
cow syndrome.
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
Fig. 17 (a) to (e): Body condition scores 
38 
Feed conservation 
Pasture and fodder production is rain fed and thus seasonal resulting in times of 
plenty and times of scarcity. The aim of conservation is to harvest the maximum 
amount of dry matter from a given area and at an optimum stage for utilization by 
animals and allow for regrowth of the forage. The two main ways of conserving 
fodder are making hay or making silage. 
 
Haymaking 
Hay is fodder conserved by drying to reduce the water content so that it can be 
stored without rotting or becoming mouldy (reducing moisture content stops 
microbial growth). The moisture content should be reduced to about 15%. The 
grasses that are very suitable for hay making include Rhodes grass, Lucerne and 
vetch. 
 
Harvesting and curing 
Harvest the fodder for haymaking when flowering is 50%. At this stage protein and 
digestibility are at maximum, after which they decline with age. The fodder should 
be harvested after 2 to 3 days of dry weather so that drying will be possible. Where 
possible, drying should be done under shade so that the dried fodder retains its 
green colour, which is an indicator of quality. Turn the fodder using farm fork to 
ensure even drying. Check the dryness by trying to break the stem. If it bends too 
much without breaking, there is still much water. Legumes and grasses can be 
mixed to make better-quality hay, e.g. Rhodes grass + lucerne. 
 
Baling hay 
Baling the hay allows more material to be stored in a given space. A good estimate 
of the amount stored makes feed budgeting easier. Baling can be manual or 
mechanized, manual baling being more economical for small-scale dairy farmers. 
Manual hay baling is done using a baling box with dimensions 85 cm long x 55 cm 
wide x 45 cm deep, open on both sides. If the hay is well pressed, the box will 
produce an average bale of 20 kg. 
Time of scoring 
Desired score 
Reasonable range 
Cows 
Calving 
3.5 
3.0-4.0 
Peak Milk 
2.0 
1.5-2.0 
Mid-lactation 
2.5 
2.0-2.5 
Dry Off 
3.5 
3.0-3.5 
Table 7. Desired and reasonable body condition scores of dairy cattle at critical times 
39 
Hay should always be stored away from direct sun and rainfall, e.g. in hay barns. 
Rodents like rats should be controlled as they can damage the hay. 
 
Characteristics of good-quality hay 
Quality of the hay should be evident on physical examination. Good-quality hay 
should; 
i) be leafy and greenish in colour 
ii) have no foreign material mixed  with it 
iii) have no smell 
 
Silage 
Silage is high-moisture fodder preserved through fermentation in the absence of air. 
These are fodders that would deteriorate in quality if allowed to dry. Silage can be 
made from grasses, fodder sorghum, green oats, green maize or Napier grass. An 
ideal crop for silage making should; 
i) contain an adequate level of fermentable sugars in the form of water-soluble 
carbohydrates 
ii) have dry matter content in the fresh crop above 20% 
iii) possess a physical structure that will allow it to compact readily in the silo 
after harvesting 
 
Crops not fulfilling these requirements may require pre-treatment such as: 
i) field wilting, to reduce moisture 
ii) fine chopping, generally 20–25 mm preferred to allow compaction 
iii) use of additives, to increase soluble carbohydrates 
 
Harvesting stages 
Napier grass should be harvested at about 1 metre when protein content is about 
10%. Maize and sorghum should be harvested at dough stage, that is when the 
grain is milky. The grains will provide water-soluble sugars and molasses is not 
necessary when ensiling. When ensiling napier grass, molasses should be added to 
increase the sugar content. To improve silage quality, poultry waste and legumes 
like lucerne and desmodium may be mixed with the material being ensiled to 
increase the level of crude protein.  
 
Types of silos 
A silo is an airtight place or receptacle for preserving green feed for future feeding 
on the farm. Silos can be either underground or above ground, the qualification 
40 
being that the silo must allow compaction and be air tight. Five types are described 
here: tube, pit, above-ground, trench and tower. 
 
Silage can be made in large plastic sacks or tubes. The plastic must have no holes 
to ensure no air enters. This is popularly referred to as tube silage. Silage can also 
be made in pits that are dug vertically into the ground and then filled and compacted 
with the silage material. 
 
An above-ground silo is made on slightly slanted ground. The material is compacted 
and covered with a polythene sheet and a layer of soil is added at the top. When 
finished, it should be dome-shaped so that it does not allow water to settle at the top 
but rather collect at the sides and drain away down the slope. 
 
The trench silo is an adaptation of the pit silo, which has long been in use. It is much 
cheaper to construct than a pit silo. Construction is done on sloping land. A trench is 
dug and then filled with silage material. This method is ideal for large-scale farms 
where the tractor is used. Drainage from rain is also controlled to avoid spoiling the 
silage. 
 
Tower silos are cylindrical and made above-ground. They are 10 m or more in 
height and 3 m or more in diameter. Tower silos containing silage are usually 
unloaded from the top of the pile. An advantage of tower silos is that the silage 
tends to pack well due to its own weight, except for the top few feet. 
 
Qualities of good silage 
Well-prepared silage is bright or light yellow-green, has a smell similar to vinegar 
and has a firm texture. Bad silage tends to smell similar to rancid butter or ammonia. 
Natural microorganisms turn the sugars in the plant material or any added as 
molasses into weak acids, which then act as a preservative. The result is a sweet-
smelling, moist feed that cattle like to eat once they get used to it. 
 
Storage and feeding 
Tube silage should be stored under shade, for example in a store. Rodents like rats 
that could tear the tube need to be controlled. When feeding, open the tube and 
scoop a layer and remember to re-tie without trapping air inside. When feeding from 
the pit, scoop in layers and cover after removing the day’s ration, making sure the 
pit is air tight. Drainage from the top should be guided to avoid rainwater draining 
into the pit. 
41 
When feeding from the above-ground method, open from the lower side of the slant, 
remove the amount you need for the day and re-cover it without trapping air inside. 
To avoid off-flavours in milk, feed silage to milking cows after milking, not before, or 
feed at least 2 hours before milking. 
 
Losses 
Nutrient losses may occur during silage making. In the field during cutting, losses 
due to respiration during wilting will be about 2% per day. If it rains, leaching may 
cause some loss. 
 
Overheating due to poor sealing gives a brown product, which may smell like 
tobacco and result in severe damage to nutrients e.g. proteins. 
 
Effluent losses of 2–10% that occur from moisture seepage contain soluble and 
highly digestible nutrients; seepage should be avoided by wilting the herbage. 
 
Silage additives 
During silage preparation, different types of additives can be added to improve the 
quality. These include fermentation stimulants. Some crops may not contain the 
right type or the right number of lactic acid bacteria. Bacterial inoculants and 
enzymes can hasten and improve fermentation by converting carbohydrates to lactic 
acid. Most inoculants contain Lactobacillus plantarum. 
 
Fermentation inhibitors include acids such as propionic, formic and sulphuric. 
Inorganic acids are more effective but are strongly corrosive thus not recommended. 
Of the organic acids, formic is more effective than propionic, lactic or acetic. 
 
Substrate or nutrient sources (grains, molasses, urea or ammonia) are used when 
there are insufficient soluble carbohydrates in the material to be ensiled (e.g. 
legumes, Napier grass, crop residues). They are also used to increase the nutritive 
value of the silage. Molasses can be added at about 9 kg/t of silage. 
 
Note: Use of additives is not a prerequisite for making good silage, but it is good for 
problem crops. 
 
General management of dairy cows 
The management practices in a herd of dairy cows can be split into 4 periods. After 
first calving, a dairy cow at any one time will be the following periods: 
42 
• Reproductive: Service period (calving to conception) or Gestation period 
(conception to calving) = Calving Interval 
 
• Productive: Lactation period (calving to drying) or Dry period (from drying to next 
calving) = Calving Interval 
 
Some management practices are period specific while some are performed during all 
the periods. There is an overlap in some of the periods: a lactating cow can be 
pregnant or not pregnant and a pregnant animal can be lactating or dry.  
Fig. 18: The different periods of the dairy cow cycle. 
 
Service period:  From calving to successful conception 
This period is expected to last between 45 and 90days. During this period, the cow is 
expected to come and heat and be bred. The main management practices are 
therefore heat detection and successful mating (natural or artificial). 
 
Heat detection:  
This is an extremely important exercise as a missed heat translates into a wasted 21 
days while efficient heat detection makes it possible to serve the animal at the right 
time. The average heat interval is 21 days with a range of 18 to 24 days. Duration of 
heat is 24 to 36 hours in exotic and crossbred cows. 
 
Several methods are used to detect heat. The most commonly used by farmers are 
behavioural signs and physical changes. 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aids to oestrus detection: 
I. 
Vasectomised or teaser bulls - These are surgically prepared bulls which are 
intact but will not impregnate the cow (teaser bulls have their penis deviated such 
that they will mount but cannot deposit semen in the cow).  Animal with nutritional 
deficiencies (eg Calcium and Phosphorous mainly during the dry season) may 
exhibit silent heat (no behavioural signs), which can be detected by 
vasectomised bulls. 
II. Records – can be used to predict date of expected heat. 
III. Pressure sensitive (commercially available) mount detectors. They are glued to 
the rump (back) of the cow suspected to be on heat and are activated by 
pressure of mounting of the cow by others. 
IV. Detection of ovarian changes: Use commercial kits to detect fall in progesterone 
levels in milk. 
 
Note: Heat should be checked three times a day.  
(b) Licking: Both cows may be in heat 
(c) Mounting head to head: The cow mounting is in 
heat 
(a) Standing to be mounted: The 
positive sign of heat is standing to be 
mounted. The cow in heat stands to 
be mounted and does not move away 
Fig. 19 (a) to (c): Behavioral signs of heat in cows 
Early heat 
Standing heat 
After heat 
• Increased nervousness/
restlessness 
• Mounting other cows 
• Swollen vulva 
• Licking other cows 
• Sniffing other cows and 
being sniffed 
• Reduced feed intake 
• Standing to be mounted 
• Clear mucus discharge 
• Sharp decline in milk 
production 
• Tail bent away from the 
vulva 
• The animal may stop 
eating 
• Dried mucus on the tail 
• Roughened tail head 
• The animal refuses to be 
mounted 
• Streaks of saliva or signs 
of leaking on her flanks 
Early signs: Watch the cow 
closely 
Best signs: Take the cow 
for service 
Late signs: Keep record 
44 
Numerous studies indicate poor oestrus (heat) detection is the most common cause 
of prolonged inter-calving intervals in dairy cattle so herd managers must insure that 
animal attendants responsible for this are competent. An oestrus detection 
efficiency of 75 % would represent outstanding performance, a standard achieved in 
very few herds. Even 60 % efficiency would be somewhat above average with 
perhaps a 45 % detection rate representing about the average for commercial dairy 
farms. 
 
Many herds, however, realize only 20 to 30 % efficiency, a rate that results in far too 
many days open. This poor detection efficiency results in greatly prolonged inter-
calving intervals and high involuntary culling for reproductive failure. Unfortunately, 
this latter situation is encountered on many dairy farms all over the world.  
 
Mating: 
Once heat has been detected, cows should be mated. 
 
When to serve:  
Present the cow for insemination at the right time to increase the chances of 
conception. Below is a guide as to the best time to present the cow for insemination:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to improve breeding performance  
• 
Serve cows 50 to 75 days after calving.  
AM – PM Rule: 
Standing heat observed 
Present for insemination 
Before 9 am 
Late evening the same day  
 
Late afternoon or evening  
Early next morning 
  
  
Hourly guide: 
                   0 hrs          3 hrs.         6 hrs                                   21 hrs       24 
hrs        27 hrs. 
 
  
Poor               Fair       Good            Excellent                   Good          Fair           
Poor 
  
 EARLY                         STANDING          HEAT                        LATE      
HEAT 
  
              First observation of standing heat 
  
45 
• 
After insemination, check 19 to 21 days later for any heat signs.  
• 
Carry out pregnancy diagnosis six to eight weeks after the last insemination.  
• 
Maintain good nutrition with balanced rations and adequate mineral 
supplementation for good fertility.  
 
Breeding methods 
Breeding can be achieved through natural service or artificial insemination, and 
irrespective of the method, the aim should be to achieve increased chances of 
conception.   
 
Natural service:  
This is where the cow is taken to a bull and left for some time for the bull to serve. 
 The advantages of this method are: 
• 
The cow has an opportunity to be served more than once; this increase the 
chance of conception. 
• 
The semen is fresh and of good quality since there is no handling. 
• 
Where the farmer does not own a bull, cost of service is lower compared to A.I. 
 
Natural service has the following disadvantages: 
• Rearing a bull is not economical especially to a small holder farmer 
• There is risk of spreading breeding diseases. 
• There is risk of inbreeding if the bull is not changed frequently 
• There is no opportunity to select the type of bull the farmer wants. 
 
Increasing the chances of conception through natural service: 
• 
Take the cow to the bull as soon as it is detected to be in heat and leave it for at 
least twelve hours. 
• 
Young inexperienced heifers should be mated with old experienced bulls. 
• 
Young inexperienced bulls should be given to old experienced cows. 
• 
The bull should be kept fit and in good health particularly the legs and feet. 
 
Natural mating can be done in two ways: 
Free/pasture mating - This method of mating is practised by farmers who own bulls 
which run full time with the cows. One bull can serve 20-25 cows. 
It has the advantage no no heat detection required and disadvantage of lack of 
accurate records and possibility of transmission of reproductive diseases e.g. 
brucellosis. 
Hand mating- The bull is enclosed in it's pen and the cows are brought in when they 
show signs of heat. Most small-scale farmers will practice this method since bulls are 
owned by few farmers and others bring their cows for service at an agreed fee.  
46 
The advantage is keeping accurate records while the disadvantage is the farmer has 
to detect heat. 
 
Artificial Insemination 
Artificial Insemination popularly referred to as AI is one of the breeding methods that 
has contributed to the development of the dairy sector in the last sixty years in 
Kenya and also worldwide. The process of artificial insemination starts with a 
healthy bull, that is disease free and producing ample quantities of high quality 
semen. The fertility of the cow is also important, the competency of the inseminator 
and a clean environment. Farmers are encouraged to use semen from proven bulls 
which is obtained from AI centres and registered service providers. 
 
Benefits of Artificial Insemination 
1. 
Prevention of venereal diseases 
2. 
Indefinite preservation of genetic materials of low cost enabling wide testing 
and selection of bulls 
3. 
Enhances genetic progress as best bulls are used widely nationally and 
internationally 
4. 
Small scale farmers through AI can access good bulls cheaply 
5. 
One is able to select the bull of interest. 
6. 
When handled properly, there is no chance of spread of breeding diseases. 
7. 
It is easy to control inbreeding. 
8. 
A.I. is the best method of improving the genetic make-up of local breeds because 
it enables semen from the very best bulls to be widely available. 
9. 
It is cost effective since the farmer does not have to rear a bull. 
 
Disadvantages of AI 
1. 
It requires very accurate heat detection and proper timing of insemination for 
greater chances of conception. 
2. 
The inseminator must be trained on the technique. 
3. 
It requires high investment in equipment. 
 
Factors affecting rate of conception: 
The fertility chain 
Successful conception is dependent on several factors, which form a fertility chain. 
The concept of the chain is that it is only as strong as the weakest link. Therefore all 
the links in the chain should be strong enough to strengthen the whole chain, as one 
weak link results in no conception. 
47 
Heat detection and time of service 
This depends on whether natural service or artificial insemination is used. A cow in 
'standing heat' stands for mounting by bull or another cow.  
 
In practice, a cow showing heat in the morning should be inseminated in the afternoon, 
while those showing heat in the evening should be inseminated the next morning. 
Semen quality and handling 
To maintain a good dairy herd, the farmer must use semen of proven bulls all the 
time. The semen must be obtained from agents or service providers registered by 
Fig. 21: Hours from beginning of standing heat 
Fig. 20: The fertility chain 
48 
the veterinary department. AI can spread disease if attention is not paid to the 
health status of the bull. All bulls at approved AI centers are constantly being 
screened for any disease to ensure that semen collected from them is safe and 
disease free. 
 
The spermatozoa should be fertile, of good concentration, high motility and of normal 
morphology (structure).  
 
A.I. Technique 
Farmers should only use registered inseminators who are competent and know how 
to handle semen and apply proper AI techniques. Handling semen involves 
retrieving semen from the tank without damaging what remains in the tank, thawing 
and loading an AI gun and successfully inseminating the cow with semen that is still 
alive and viable. 
 
Nutritional factors. 
Nutrition is the single most important factor that affects cow fertility than any other 
factor. Low protein and low energy intake causes delayed puberty, silent heat and 
infertile ovary. Vitamin A and D are heavily involved in reproduction and their 
deficiency affects conception and pregnancy. Overfeeding results in fatty ovaries, low 
hormonal secretion hence low conception rate. 
 
Note that today’s fertility is a reflection of the cow’s environment and management 
during the previous two or three months. Also decisions made today can affect a 
cow’s fertility for several months to come. 
Normal health of female genital tract.  
The cow should be maintained in good health condition. Any disease of the female 
reproductive tract affects conception rate. The uterus should be treated before 
insemination if it is suspected to be diseased. 
 
Indicators of infertility 
Fertility problems are manifested through the very long calving intervals as a result of a 
prolonged service period. Some of the conditions that may indicate a fertility problem 
include: 
i. Abnormal oestrus: Absence of heat, irregular heat, silent heat, constant heat 
(nymphomania) 
ii. Embryonic or foetal death: Abortions, mummified foetus (foetus dying in uterus 
and becoming mummified) 
iii. Outbreak of reproductive diseases e.g. brucellosis or trichomoniasis 
49 
Fertility indices 
To gauge whether the farm is successful in fertility management of the herd, the 
following indices can be used. 
 
a) Calving interval: 
An efficient breeding program influences the productivity of a cow in that it determines 
the number of calves born and the total milk produced throughout its lifetime. A good 
indicator of successful breeding is a calving interval of one year. 
 
b)  Conception rate (number of animals conceiving as percent of number served) 
70% after 1st service 
80% after 2nd service 
>90% after 3rd service 
Animals not conceiving after 3 inseminations should be culled if all the factors in the 
fertility chain have been considered. 
 
c) Desired herd composition 
Cows in milk  
 
 
 
 45% 
Dry cows    
 
 
    
   9% 
Pregnant heifers  
 
    
   8% 
Heifers (weaning to first service)   14% 
Heifers (birth to weaning)    
 24% 
 
Estrus synchronization 
Sometimes for ease of management, it is desirable for a group of animals to calve at 
the same time necessitating that animals come on heat at the same time. To achieve 
this, the animals are synchronised using hormones.  
 
Synchronization is dependent on manipulation of hormonal events occurring during 
normal oestrous cycle. It is achieved via premature leuteolysis using prostaglandins 
(PG) or simulation of corpus leuteum (CL) function by administering progesterone 
followed by abrupt withdrawal. 
 
Embryo transfer 
This is a process through which an embryo is harvested from one cow and transferred 
to another cow to complete the pregnancy.  
 
50 
The process involves super-ovulation of the donor genetically superior cow (cow 
injected with hormone to stimulate development of many eggs), insemination of cow 
with high quality semen, synchronization of oestrous cycle of donor and recipient cows, 
flushing out the embryos from donor cow and transfer of embryo to recipient cow. 
 
Gestation period (from successful conception to calving (280 ±10days)) 
During early pregnancy the foetal growth is slow and accelerates towards the end. 
Regeneration of mammary glands occurs towards the end of gestation in preparation 
of lactation. 
 
During the first two months of gestation, growth of embryo is minimal but during the 
last three months there is marked growth of foetus which is dependent on nutritional 
level of dam, breed of animal and health of dam. 
 
Therefore, during the last few weeks of pregnancy, cows should be fed enough to 
cater for the rapid growth of foetus and build up body reserves in readiness for the 
next lactation. This feeding is referred to as 'steaming' and coincides with the dry 
period (refer to feeding during dry period). 
 
Lactation period: (calving to when the cow is dried: 305 days) 
This period is variable due to variation in the service period but should be 
approximately 305days. Milk production peaks at around the 8th week depending on 
the feeding regime. Cows that are not well fed do not peak. 
 
Management during this period should aim at getting as much milk from the cow as 
she can produce and as hygienically as possible for human consumption. 
 
Factors affecting milk production 
Milk production is not constant but varies from farm to farm and animal to animal. This 
variation allows for the manipulation to improve milk yield. 
 
Animal factors: 
Breed – Capacity for milk production decreases as follows - Friesian, Ayrshire, 
Guernsey, Jersey, Sahiwal, Boran and Zebu. This is attributable to the genetic 
makeup of the animal. 
 
Parity (age)- Mature cows (>6 yrs) produce 25% more milk than young cows. First 
lactation yields 25% less than 4th lactation. After peak yield there is a decline, as cow 
51 
grows old. As milk yield increases with age, the herd should have both young animals 
(for genetic improvement) and old cows for higher milk production. 
 
Stage of lactation- Milk production increases during the first two months following 
calving (peak production), then declines gradually thereafter. 
 
Oestrus -Milk production drops the day the cow is on heat or day following heat. 
Pregnancy- By the 4th to 5th month of pregnancy, total milk production of gestating 
cows declines faster than that of non- pregnant cows. 
 
Size- Bigger cows will produce more milk than smaller cows of similar breed. 
 
Environmental factors: 
Feed – Nutrition is the most important determinant and a deficiency of nutrients, 
especially protein or energy will lower milk yield. 
 
Length of dry period - A short dry period (<60d) usually results in lower milk production. 
 
Condition of cow at calving - Excessively thin or fat cows produce less milk. 
 
Frequency of milking - Cows milked 3 times produce 10-25% more milk than those 
milked twice. Cows milked 4 times produced 5-15% more milk than those milked thrice. 
Though there is increased milk yield with more than twice a day milking, there is extra 
labour and materials which has to be considered. More than twice a day milking is only 
recommended if economical (the extra milk pays for the extra cost of milking), for high 
yielding cows and for mastitis cases. 
 
Farm layout - The relationship of watering points, pasture paddocks and the milking 
parlour is important. Animals walking long distances will utilize a lot of energy, which 
should go to milk synthesis. 
 
Disease- Diseases like mastitis, ketosis, milk fever and others affect milk production. 
 
Change of milker and milking routine will lower milk yield. 
  
Climate -high temperatures reduce milk yield more drastically than low temperatures 
(affect animal comfort and feed intake). Exotic breeds are affected more affected by 
temperature than local breeds. 
52 
Dry period (drying to calving: 60days) 
The dry period should last for about 60 days irrespective of whether the cow is still 
producing a lot of milk. Attempts should be made to minimize stress to the cow during 
the drying especially for high yielders. 
 
Ways of drying cows: 
• 
The feed intake should be reduce to maintenance level by withdrawing the 
concentrate and for high yielder, feed on low quality forages (eg straw) to reduce 
milk synthesis. 
• 
For low yielding cows, just stop milking. Pressure builds up in udder and milk 
production is cut off. 
• 
If cow is a high yielder, practice intermittent milking i.e. skip some milking times 
(milk only in mornings) so as to reduce milk synthesis due to pressure build up in 
udder while reducing feed intake. 
• 
Water can be temporarily withdrawn for very high yielders to reduce milk 
synthesis. 
• 
After cessation of milking, treat (infuse) all the quarters with long acting 
antibiotics to prevent development of mastitis. 
 
Reasons of drying  
There are several reasons that necessitate the drying the of cow: 
i. Build up body reserves to meet next production - if a cow is not dried in time, it 
affects the milk production during the next lactation. 
ii. Allow animal to regenerate alveolar tissue (milk synthesizing tissue) which might 
have atrophied during the lactation period. 
iii. Save nutrients for the fast growing foetus. During the last phase of pregnancy, the 
calf grows at a fast rate and drying saves nutrients for its growth. 
 
Steaming up 
Steaming up of the cows is commencement to feeding extra ration, especially of 
concentrates, to late pregnant cows in an attempt to promote maximum milk 
production from the very beginning of the next lactation. 
  
Some of the advantages of steaming up is provision of the extra nutrient required for 
the accelerated foetal growth, under regeneration and for cow to improve its body 
condition. 
 
53 
CHAPTER 5: CLEAN MILK PRODUCTION 
Milk 
Milk contains approximately 86% water, 4.7% sugar (lactose), 4.1% fat, 4.2% protein 
and 1% minerals. It supports the growth of micro-organisms and thus is prone to 
contamination.  
The purpose of milking a dairy cow is to obtain milk that is fit for human consumption. 
Milk from the udder of a healthy cow contains very few bacteria and to ensure that it 
remains fresh for long it should be handled under conditions of good hygiene. 
Unclean milk can be a source of disease to the consumer, rejected at the market and 
so is a loss to the farmer, does not keep for long and is not good for processing. 
 
Milking 
The milking procedure is the first step in obtaining clean milk. At the farm this starts 
with ensuring the cow to be milked is healthy. 
 
The cow 
The cow should be well fed with a diet well balanced with forage and concentrates to 
ensure high production of good quality milk. Feeding very high amounts of 
concentrates and low amounts of forages results in milk with low butter fat. On the 
other hand feeding too little concentrates leads to low milk yield.  
An unhealthy cow will feed less and produce less milk. Cows should always be kept 
healthy and clean as sick animals can transmit diseases like tuberculosis and 
brucellosis to milk consumers. If a cow is suspected to be sick, a qualiﬁed veterinary 
practitioner should be contacted immediately.  Milk from a cow that is being treated 
with antibiotics should not be consumed or sold until the withdrawal period is over. 
Farmers are encouraged to vaccinate their animals against brucellosis. Animals 
should also be checked periodically for all types of contagious diseases and treated 
promptly in case they are infected. 
Mastitis is an inﬂammation of the mammary glands in the udder caused by infection 
with disease-causing bacteria which can be controlled by observing general hygiene 
and proper milking procedure. 
 
The milker 
Should:  
• be healthy and clean 
• Maintain short nails and hair (for ladies, cover the head when milking) 
54 
• 
Never smoke during milking time 
• 
Milk quickly and completely without interruptions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The environment 
• 
A milking shed (parlor) which can be permanent or movable should be constructed. 
It should be located away from any smells. 
• 
The floor of shed should be clean and dry and if possible have a cement floor for 
ease of cleaning. 
• 
The shed should be cleaned after every milking and animals kept off outside 
milking time. 
Equipment 
• 
Use seamless aluminum or stainless steel cans for milking and storing milk. Plastic 
container is difficult to clean.  
• 
Clean utensils immediately after milking or after emptying milk: rinse with cold 
water, scrub with a brush using hot water with detergent then rinse with cold water. 
Place upside down on a rack and dry in the sun. 
• 
Store utensils in a safe, clean and well ventilated room. 
Fig. 22: The do’s and don'ts of hand milking a dairy cow 
55 
Milking 
Milking is the most important activity in a dairy farm. Milk can be extracted either by 
hand or by machine. Hand milking is an art, which is improved with practice. 
 
Alveolar cells synthesize milk, which is stored in the gland cistern. The sphincter 
muscle at the tip of the teat (teat sphincter) control milk let down. For efficient milking, 
teat should be of moderate size, symmetrical and enough tension of the sphincter 
muscle. 
 
Practical aspects of milking: 
Milk synthesis and secretion is continuous unless interfered with by pressure from the 
filling of the gland cistern (this explains why more milk is extracted by frequent 
emptying (milking) to ensure pressure does not built up). The ejection of milk from 
alveolar lumen is under influence of oxytocin (hormone). 
 
Steps: 
The cow is brought to the milking parlour as calmly as possible. Frightening the animal 
at this stage has a negative effect on milk let down due to release of adrenaline 
(hormone) which has a negative effect on milk letdown. 
1. 
Feed the cow it's production ration (this is optional depending on the feeding 
system) - This calms the animal and stimulates milk letdown. 
2. 
Restrain animal - tie hind legs above hock joint in the form of a figure 8. A 
loose knot should be used to safeguard both animal and man (applicable only 
for hand milking). 
3. 
Wash hands with soap and clean water before milking. Dry hands with towel. 
4. 
Test for mastitis using a strip cup - strip first few rays of milk into strip cup 
from each quarter and observe for any abnormalities. If mastitis is detected, 
the cow should be milked last. 
Fig. 23: Milk cans 
56 
5. 
Wash udder with warm clean water with disinfectant using a clean towel. 
Warm water also stimulates milk let down. Dry udder using a dry towel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 
Apply milking jelly - prevents cracking of teats and eases milking (for hand 
milking only) 
7. 
 Milk quickly and completely by squeezing the teat, do not pull. Milking each 
cow should take 7–10 minutes at most.  
8. 
Use clean containers for milking. 
9. 
After milking: Strip the animal - getting last drops of milk from udder to avoid 
incomplete milking (can lead to mastitis). 
10.  After milking dip the teats in a teat dip (disinfectant to ensure that bacteria do 
not gain entry through the teat sphincter which is loose immediately after 
milking).  
Fig. 24: Using a strip cup 
Fig. 25: Area of udder to be cleaned 
57 
Fig. 26: Step by step method of hand milking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is recommended that the animal remain in a standing position for at least one hour to 
ensure the teat does not come into contact with the ground while the sphincter is still 
loose. 
 
Note:  
• 
Routine milking procedures stimulate milk letdown and should therefore not be 
changed unnecessarily. 
• 
After cow has been maximally stimulated for milk let down, it should be milked 
immediately since the stimulus reduces over time. Oxytocin effects are maximum 
between 5-10 minutes, thus milking should be completed during this time.  
• 
Don't harass animal since adrenaline (hormone produced due to fright) has 
opposite effect of oxytocin (milk let down hormone). 
Fig. 27: Dipping cow teats in disinfectant 
58 
Handling the milk  
The following guidelines should be followed to avoid milk spoilage: 
• 
Filter milk immediately after milking: Use a white filter cloth or strainer. Disinfect, 
wash and dry the cloth/strainer after use 
• 
Always handle milk in clean, preferably metal, containers. 
• 
When transferring milk between containers, pour the milk instead of scooping 
since scooping may introduce spoilage bacteria. 
• 
Do not store milk at high temperatures. 
• 
Do not handle milk if you are sick. Seek medical treatment and resume work only 
when the doctor says you are ﬁt to do so 
• 
Store milk in a cool clean place preferably lockable room set aside for milk only. If 
storing overnight, keep the milk in cold/ chilled water. 
• 
Deliver milk to the market as soon as possible preferably in the cool morning or 
evening. 
Milk Storage 
Store the milk without chemicals in a lockable cool and clean place.Do not mix warm 
(morning) milk with cool (evening) milk; deliver to the collection centre separately or 
cool the warm milk before mixing. 
Milk Preservation 
Milk is highly perishable hence it should be preserved to ensure it is safe for human 
consumption at the home and that it reaches the processor and/or final consumer in 
good condition. The success of any preservation method is highly dependent on 
hygiene conditions under which the milk was produced. Hence milk produced from a 
healthy cow, milked by a healthy milker using clean equipment will be clean and more 
likely to keep long. Milk can be preserved using the following simple methods:    
Cooling 
Cooling milk slows down the growth and activity of germs and hence prevents spoilage. 
Milk can be cooled through: 
• Keeping under a shade 
• Dipping the containers with milk in a cold water bath, flowing stream of cooling 
tank 
• Keeping the milk in a refrigerator 
• Using a charcoal cooler 
• Using cooling rings: if cool (10°C or less) running water is available, you can pass 
it through a perforated ring so that it flows over the cans 
• Using an electrical cooling tank. 
59 
When cooling milk, loosen the lids of the cans to allow the air to escape, and make 
sure no water gets into the milk. Cover the cooling tank with a lid to protect the milk 
from insects and dust. 
Heating 
Heating kills many bacteria and heated milk will keep longer. It also gets rid of harmful 
micro-organisms that could transfer diseases from the cow to humans. The best 
method of heating milk (to retain the taste and avoiding off-flavours) is to immerse the 
milk can in boiling water for at least 30 minutes.  
Milk to be consumed at home should be boiled, using a large pan or other cooking 
container. Milk can be heated to a certain temperature and kept at that temperature for 
some time to kill germs, then cooled. This is called pasteurisation. A thermometer is 
required for monitoring the temperatures. Milk can also be subjected to low heat 
treatment. Heat the milk to 65°C then cool. 
Chemicals  
Chemicals can be used to preserve milk but only on advice from the collecting centre 
because it is important to use the correct types and amounts. Use of chemicals is 
illegal in some countries and only milk delivered to a dairy plant should be preserved 
with chemicals. Nevertheless, chemicals allow un-cooled milk to keep longer even in 
high temperatures and, if used correctly, chemicals have little effect on the physical 
quality of the milk. 
Proper cleaning of milk equipment 
Milk cans 
Immediately cans are emptied of milk they should be cleaned as follows:  
• 
Rinse with cold water. 
• 
Scrubbing with brush and warm detergent (any un-perfumed liquid soap will do). 
• 
Rinse with cold water. 
• 
Sterilize (sanitise) with boiling water or steam if available or use dairy sanitising 
solution such hypochlorite or commercial brand preparations in accordance with 
manufacturer’s instructions. 
• 
Dry cans on a drying rack. Exposure to sunlight will enhance killing off bacteria 
during drip drying of cans. 
Milking machines 
Milking machines should be cleaned according to recommended practice:  
• 
Rinse with cold water. 
• 
Use the “cleaning-in-place” (CIP) method where detergent in hot water is circulated 
in the system. 
60 
• Rinse with hot water. 
 
Timely replacement of worn out rubber parts should be undertaken regularly. 
Cleaning and sanitation of milk transportation equipment 
Transport of larger quantities of milk requires insulated bulk tankers. These are very 
expensive and require special additional equipment like pumps which should also be 
thoroughly cleaned by the “cleaning-in-place” (CIP) method. 
Milk transportation equipment should be properly cleaned and sanitised because milk 
provides an ideal medium for growth of bacteria. Select detergents and sanitizers that 
will not corrode the material from which the equipment is made. Cleaning and 
sanitizing are complementary processes. 
 
Maintenance of milk handling and cooling equipment 
Maintenance of milk coolers 
For best use of milk cooling equipment, it is important to adhere to the following: 
• 
Avoid opening the milk cooler unnecessarily to prevent warm air from entering 
• 
Ensure that the evaporator is well ventilated for proper function of cooler 
• 
Ensure that the cooler always has enough refrigerant in the system. 
• 
Connect the cooler to a voltage stabiliser to provide for a constant supply of 
electricity. 
• 
Set up schedules for cleaning and preventive maintenance and ensure that they 
are followed. Any mechanical repairs should be carried out by a trained 
technician. 
• 
Have a standby generator in case of power failure. 
 
Characteristics and maintenance of bulk tanks 
Milk cans should be maintained by proper handling and adherence to regular cleaning 
and sanitation schedules. Cleaning, sanitizing and rinsing of bulk tankers and 
accessories like pumps should be done immediately after emptying the milk. The 
valves, hose connections and lid of the tanker should be covered to prevent the milk 
from being contaminated with dirt. 
 
Importance of carrier maintenance 
Milk transport vehicles often get dented during loading and offloading. Milk cans are 
designed with rims at the bottom to resist deformation during rough handling. Milk 
should be transported as quickly as possible to the milk cooling centre or processing 
factory to avoid spoilage. But milk that already has many bacteria   will not keep for 
long, even when cooled.  
61 
For small scale dairy farmers, setting up a milk cooling centre centrally may be the 
ideal solution. Where farmers bring their milk to a cooling centre through a cooperative, 
they should do so as soon as milking is completed. 
 
A Milk cooling centre with a capacity of 1000 - 3000 litres will serve up to 300 small 
holder farmers ensuring that the quality of their milk when produced under hygienic 
conditions is well preserved and accepted at the processing plant. 
 
It is important to remember that under a hot environment milk will spoil within 3-4 hours. 
So any means of cooling that will lower the temperature of milk from 380C at milking 
will help to prevent multiplication of bacteria. There are several options available. 
 
In highland areas such as Kinangop, Limuru, Timboroa where the water temperature 
can be as low as 10oC, the milk may be cooled down to 20oC using water temperature 
through immersing milk cans in a water trough connected to a water tap or water 
spring.  
 
Surface milk cooler 
In hot areas like in the coast, Western Province, North Eastern, Nyanza, cooling of 
milk to 3-50C below ambient temperature may be achieved through use of charcoal 
lined evaporative cooling cabinet. 
Milk transport to processing factory 
Bulk milk transport 
Milk cooled on the farm or cooling centre may be transported in milk cans or in bulk 
tankers. Bulk tankers are insulated, so the milk will remain cold until it reaches the 
plant. This is dependent  on transport being fast, i.e. short distance or good roads 
enabling milk to be delivered before the temperature of milk rises above 100C. 
 
Alternatively, such milk may be filled in cans and transported in milk cans. This has 
advantageous in case of a farmer’s delivering a can of POOR quality milk, it does not 
get mixed with other farmers’ GOOD quality milk and spoil the lot. Since the cans are 
not insulated, the transport to the factory must be efficient enough to enable milk reach 
the factory in acceptable condition. 
 
In the case of farmers delivering milk to a collection point it is advisable that the milk 
cans are placed in a shaded area while awaiting pick-up by a milk transport vehicle. 
 
62 
Bad milk will be rejected at the dairy plant resulting in the farmer losing money.  The 
milk transporter may lose money if the spoilage was due their fault. The nation will 
suffer because its people will not have the high quality food. To avoid all these bad 
things happening, hygienic milk handling is essential at each stage; at the farm, 
cooling centre and during transport.  
Fig. 28: Provision of shade at pick up points is important 
BASIC MILK QUALITY TESTS 
There are four simple milk quality tests that may be carried out routinely both at the 
farm and milk collection centre: 
• 
Sight-and-smell (organoleptic) test 
• 
Clot-on-boiling test 
• 
Alcohol test 
• 
Lactometer test 
These tests ensure that only milk of acceptable quality is received and require only a 
small amount (sample) of milk from each container. If the sample of milk doesn’t pass 
the test, the milk from that container will be rejected and in most cases, the farmer 
bears the loss. Thus, it is important that milk is handled in accordance with good 
hygienic practice particularly at the farm. The procedures of these milk quality tests are 
described below: 
 
Organoleptic test 
This should be the first test to be performed and it involves assessing the milk with 
63 
regard to its smell, appearance and colour. This test is quick and cheap to carry out, 
allowing for segregation of poor quality milk. No equipment is required, but the tester 
should have a good sense of sight and smell. Milk that cannot be adequately judged in 
this way is subjected to tests that are more objective. 
 
Procedure 
• 
Open a can of milk. 
• 
Immediately smell the milk and establish the nature and intensity of smell, if any. 
The milk will not be accepted if it smells slightly sour or has foreign odours like 
paint or paraffin. 
• 
Observe the colour of milk. Deviation from the normal yellowish-white colour 
indicates damage to the udder (reddish—blood, or yellow—pus). 
• 
Check for any foreign bodies or physical dirt, which may indicate that the milking 
and handling were not done hygienically. 
• 
Touch the milk container to feel whether it is warm or cold. This indicates how 
long the milk has taken since milking (if not chilled thereafter) and will inﬂuence 
the lactometer test for adulteration (see below). 
 
Abnormal appearance and smell that may cause milk to be rejected could be due to: 
• 
Type of feed or atmospheric taint (e.g. feeding silage or brewer’s waste too close 
to milking time) 
• 
Cows in late lactation or in some cows when on heat or soon after conception 
(due to hormonal changes) 
• 
Bacterial taints (from cows with mastitis) 
• 
Chemical taints or discolouring (may be due to equipment not rinsed properly) 
• 
Advanced acidiﬁcation or souring (milk that is fermenting) 
• 
Marked separation of fat may be caused by: 
• 
Milk previously chilled and subjected to excessive shaking during transportation 
• 
Adulteration with other solids (may also show as sediments or particles) 
• 
Boiling, if milk fat is hardened 
 
Clot-on-boiling test 
This test is quick and simple. It allows for detection of milk that has been kept for too 
long without cooling and has developed high acidity, or milk that has a very high 
percentage of colostrum and hence protein. Such milk does not withstand heat 
treatment hence this test could be positive at a much lower acidity.  
 
64 
Procedure  
• 
Boil a small amount of milk for a few seconds in a spoon or other suitable 
container. 
• 
Observe immediately for clotting. 
• 
The milk will be rejected if there is visible clotting, coagulation or precipitation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alcohol test 
The test is quick and simple. The specific type of alcohol used is known as “ethanol”. 
This test is more sensitive to lower levels of acidity and can therefore detect bad milk 
that may have passed the previous two tests. It also detects milk that has kept for long 
without cooling, colostrum or milk from a cow with mastitis. Because this test is quite 
sensitive, milk that passes this test can keep for some hours (at least two hours) 
before it goes bad. 
 
Procedure  
• 
Use a syringe to draw equal amounts of milk and 70% alcohol solution into  
• 
a small tube or glass cup (such as those used to administer medicine to children). 
• 
Mix 2 ml milk with 2 ml 70% alcohol and observe for clotting or coagulation. 
• 
If the tested milk sample coagulates, clots or precipitates, the milk will be rejected. 
If the milk coagulates, it fails the test 
Mix 2 ml of milk with 2 ml of 70% alcohol 
65 
Lactometer test 
This test is used to determine if the milk has been adulterated with water or solids. 
Addition of anything to milk can introduce bacteria that will make it spoil quickly, is 
dishonest and is therefore illegal. The lactometer test is based on the fact that milk has 
a heavier weight or density (1.026–1.032 g/ml) compared to water (1.000 g/ml). When 
water or other solids are added to milk, the density either decreases (if water is added) 
or increases (if solids are added). If milk fat (cream) is added to milk, the density 
decreases. The equipment used to measure milk density is called a lactometer. Most 
lactometers are usually marked from “0” (representing density of 1.000 g/ml) to 
“40” (representing density of 1.040 g/ml). 
 
Procedure 
• Leave the milk to cool at room temperature for at least 30 minutes and ensure its 
temperature is about 20°C. 
• Stir the milk sample and pour it gently into a 200 ml measuring cylinder or any 
container deeper than the length of the lactometer. 
• Let the lactometer sink slowly into the milk. 
• Take the lactometer reading just above the surface of the milk. 
 
If the temperature of the milk is different from the lactometer calibration temperature 
(20°C), then use this correction factor: 
• For each °C above the calibration temperature, add 0.2 lactometer “degrees” (°L) 
to the observed lactometer reading. 
• For each °C below calibration temperature, subtract 0.2 lactometer “degrees” (°L) 
from the observed lactometer reading. 
• Note: These calculations are done on the lactometer readings (e.g. 29 instead of 
the true density of 1.029 g/ml). 
66 
If the milk is normal, its lactometer reading will be between 26 and 32. If the lactom-
eter reading is below 26 or above 32, the milk will be rejected because it means that 
it has been adulterated with added water or solids.  
Table 9. Examples of how to calculate the true lactometer readings when the 
milk temperature differs from the calibration temperature of 20°C 
Milk 
temperature °C 
Observed 
lactometer 
reading °L 
Correction 
°L 
True lactometer 
reading °L 
True density 
g/ml 
  
17 
30.6 
- 0.6 
30.0 
1.030 
20 
30.0 
nil 
30.0 
1.030 
23 
29.4 
+ 0.6 
30.0 
1.030 
67 
CHAPTER 6: DAIRY CATTLE HOUSING 
General Housing Requirements 
Dairy cattle will be more efficient in the production of milk and in reproduction if they 
are protected from extreme heat, and particularly from direct sunshine. This can be 
achieved through provision of shade in tropical and subtropical climates. If dairy 
cattle are confined, the area should be free of mud and manure in order to reduce 
hoof infection to a minimum. Concrete floors or pavements are ideal where the area 
per cow is limited. However, where ample space is available, an earth yard, properly 
sloped for good drainage is adequate. 
Zero Grazing  
Majority of dairy animals are kept by smallholder farmers under zero grazing or semi 
zero grazing systems. Below is a layout of a zero grazing unit five cows. 
 
Fig. 29: Layout of a zero grazing unit for 5 cows 
68 
Sun Shade 
When constructing a shade structure, it should allow 2.5 to 3m per animal which will 
give the minimum desirable protection for cattle, whether it be for one animal 
belonging to a small holder or many animals in a commercial herd. The roof should 
be a minimum of 3m high to allow air movement. If financially feasible, all the area 
that will be shaded some time during the day should be paved with good quality 
concrete.  
The size of this paved area depends on the orientation of the shade structure. If the 
longitudinal axis is east and west, part of the floor under the roof will be in shade all 
day. Extending the floor approximately one third its length on the east and on the 
west, a paved surface will provide for the shaded area at all times. 
 
If the longitudinal axis is north and south, the paved area must be 3 times the roof 
area i.e. 1/3 to the east, 1/3 to the west and l/3 underneath.  
 
In deciding which orientation to build, the following factors need be considered: 
1. 
With the east-west orientation the feed and water troughs can be under the 
shade which will allow the cows to eat and drink in shade at any time of the 
day. The shaded area, however, should be increased to 3 to 4m² per cow. By 
locating the feed and water in the shade, feed consumption will be encouraged, 
but also more manure will be dropped in the shaded area which in turn will 
lead to dirty cows.  
2. 
With the north-south orientation, the sun will strike every part of the floor area 
under and on either side of the roof at some time during the day. This will help 
to keep the floored area dry. A shaded area of 2.5 to 3m² per cow is adequate 
if feed and water troughs are placed away from the shaded area.  
Fig. 30: A zero grazing unit complete with a sun shade structure 
69 
3. 
If it is felt that paving is too costly, the north-south orientation is the best choice 
in order to keep the area as dry as possible.  
4. 
In regions where temperatures average 30°C or more for up to five hours per 
day during some period of the year, the east-west orientation is most beneficial.  
 
The gable roof is more wind resistant than a single pitch roof and allows for a centre 
vent. A woven mat of local materials can be installed between the rafters and the 
corrugated iron roof to reduce radiation from the steel and lower temperatures just 
under the roof by 10°C or more. 
 
Deep-Bedded Sheds 
In a deep-bedded system, straw, sawdust, shavings or other bedding material is 
periodically placed in the resting area so that a mixture of bedding and manure 
builds up in a thick layer. Although this increases the bulk of manure, it may be 
easier to handle than wet manure alone. This system is most practical when 
bedding is plentiful and cheap. By designing the building to be partially enclosed on 
the east and west, the shading characteristics can be improved. In as much as a 
well drained earth floor is quite adequate, such a building will compare favourably in 
cost with a shaded area which is paved. 
 
Loose Housing with Free Stalls 
Although simple yard and a shade or yard and bedded shed systems are entirely 
satisfactory in warm climates, particularly in semi-arid areas, some farmers may 
prefer a system with somewhat more protection. A loose housing yard and shed 
with free stalls will satisfy this need. Less bedding will be required and less manure 
will have to be removed. 
 
Free stalls must be of the right size in order to keep the animals clean and to reduce 
injuries to a minimum. When stalls are too small, injuries to teats will increase and 
the cows may also tend to lie in other areas that are less clean than the stalls. If the 
stalls are too large, cows will get dirty from manure dropped in the stall and more 
labour will be expended in cleaning the shed area. A bar placed across the top of 
the free stalls will prevent the cow from moving too far forward in the stall for 
comfortable lying down movements, and it will encourage her to take a step 
backwards when standing so that manure is dropped outside the stall. 
 
The bar must, however, not interfere with her normal lying and rising movements. 
The floor of the stall must be of a non-slippery material, such as soil. A good 
foothold is essential during rising and lying down movements to avoid injury. A 
70 
100mm ledge at the back edge of the free stall will prevent any bedding from being 
pulled out to the alley. The number of stalls should ordinarily correspond with the 
number of animals housed, except that in large herds (80 or more), only about 90% 
of the animals need to be accommodated at one time. Young stock may be held in 
yards with shade or in sheds with either free stalls or deep bedding. 
 
The alley behind the free stalls (cubicles) must be wide enough to allow the cows 
smooth passage and the following minimum widths apply: 
The tie and feed barrier construction must allow the cow free head movements while 
lying down as well as standing up, but should prevent her from stepping forward into 
the feed trough. Most types of yokes restrict the cow's movements too much. A 
single neck nail, set about 1 m high and 0.2m in over the merger may bruise the 
cow's neck when she pushes forward to reach the feed. 
 
Bull Pens 
A bull pen should have a shaded resting area of 12 to 15m² and a large exercise 
area of 20 to 30m². The walls of the pen must be strong. Eight horizontal rails of 
minimum 100mm round timber or 50mm galvanised steel tubes to a total height of 
1.5m and fixed to 200mm timber posts not more than 2m apart will be sufficient. The 
gate must be designed so that the bull cannot lift it off its hinges and there should be 
at least two exits where the herdsman can escape. 
A service stall where the cow can be tethered prior to and during service is usually 
provided close to the bull pen.  
 
 
Table 10. Area for bedded sheds and dimensions of free stalls (cubicles) 
Animal 
A
g
e 
Months 
Weight kg 
Bedded Shed Area 
per Animal (m²) 
Free Stalls 
Dimensions (m) 
A 
B 
Length 
Widt
h 
Young stock 
1.5 - 3 
70 - 100 
1.5 
1.4 
1.2 
0.6 
Young stock 
3 - 6 
100- 175 
2.0 
1.8 
1.5 
0.7 
Young stock 
6 - 12 
175 - 250 
2.5 
2.1 
1.8 
0.8 
Young stock 
12 - 18 
250 - 350 
3.0 
2.3 
1.9 
0.9 
Bred heifers and small 
milking cows 
  
400 - 500 
3.5 
2.5 
2.1 
1. 1 
Milking cows 
500 - 600 
4.0 
3.0 
2.2 
1.2 
Large milking cows 
> 600 
5.0 
3.5 
2.3 
1.2 
A -Enclosed and fully covered bedded shed B - Bedded shed in conjunction with exercise yard 
71 
Alleyways 
It is desirable to pave the alley, but if that is not possible, the distance between the 
free stalls (cubicles) and the feed trough should be doubled or tripled. 
 
A concrete pit or sloping slab in which to accumulate manure is essential. If the alley 
is paved, the pit can also collect urine. In fact, paving the alley not only saves space, 
but the value of the urine will help to pay for the paving. 
 
The circular manure tank a volume of 10m³ will be adequate to store the manure 
produced during one month plus any rainfall collected in the alley. If more stalls are 
added the capacity of the tank will need to be increased or the interval between the 
emptying shortened. 
 
Water Catchment 
A water tank to collect water from the roof can be very useful unless there is an 
abundant supply of water nearby. 
 
Housing for the Medium to Large Scale Herds 
For the farmer with up to 30 cows a yard with paved shade and feed area would be 
suitable. The yard and feeding area may alternatively be combined with an open 
sided barn designed for deep bedding or equipped with free stalls and where the 
herd consists of high yielding cows the milking shed may be equipped with a bucket 
milking machine. Some farmers with up to 30 cows may even consider using an 
open sided tie-stall shed. 
 
In general a medium or large scale dairy unit may include the following facilities: 
1. 
Resting area for cows:  
a) 
Paved shade, or  
b) 
Deep bedding in an open sided barn, or  
c) 
 Free-stalls in an open sided barn 
2. 
 Exercise yard (paved or unpaved) 
3. 
Paved feed area:  
a) 
Fence line feed trough (shaded or unshaded), or  
b) 
Self-feeding from a silage clamp  
4. 
 Milking Centre:  
a) Milking shed or parlour,  
b) Collecting yard (part of the exercise yard),  
72 
c) Dairy including milk store 
d)  Motor room  
5. 
Calving pen(s) 
6. 
Calf accommodation 
7. 
Young stock accommodation (yard with paved shade and feed area)  
8. 
Bulk feed store (hay and silage)  
9. 
Concentrate feed store 
10.  Veterinary facilities: 
a) Diversion pen with Artificial Insemination stalls 
b) Isolation pen  
11.  Waste stores:  
a) Slurry storage, or  
b) Separate storage of solids and effluents  
12. Office and staff facilities 
 
Each of the parts of the dairy unit may be planned in many different ways to suit the 
production system and the chosen method of feeding. Some requirements and work 
routines to consider when the layout is planned are as follows: 
a) Movement of cattle for feeding, milking and perhaps to pasture.  
b) Movement of bulk feed from store to feeding area and concentrates 
from store to milking shed or parlour.  
c) Transfer of milk from milking shed or parlour to dairy and then off the 
farm. Clean and dirty activities, such as milk handling and waste 
disposal, should be separated as far as possible.  
d) The diversion pen with Artificial Insemination stalls and any bull pen 
should be close to the milking centre as any symptoms of heat or 
illness are commonly discovered during milking and cows are easily 
separated from the rest of the herd while leaving the milking.  
e) Easy and periodical cleaning of accommodation, yards, milking 
facilities and dairy, and transfer of the waste to storage and then to the 
fields.  
f) The movements of the herdsman. Minimum travel to move cows in or 
out of milking area.  
g) Provision for future expansion of the various parts of the unit. 
73 
CHAPTER 7: COMMON DISEASES 
Mastitis 
Mastitis is an infection (inflammation) of the udder caused by microorganisms 
(bacteria) entering the quarter through the teat end. When the bacteria load 
becomes too high due to dirty environment or damaged teats (allowing invasion), 
infection may occur. Most of the mastitis cases (about 95%) are subclinical (show 
no signs) but result in lower milk production and higher cell count (an indicator of 
milk spoilage). When stress occurs, subclinical mastitis flares up and become 
clinical. 
 
Causes of Mastitis 
Bacteria are by far the most common causes of mastitis. Chief pathogens include 
- Streptococcus agalactiae 
- Staphylococcus aureus 
 
S. agalactiae is the most common cause of subclinical mastitis but rarely cause 
acute mastitis. The organism lives inside the cow's udder and survives only for a 
short time outside the mammary gland. It spreads primarily during milking via the 
milking machine, and contaminated hands and materials (cloths).  
 
S. aureus lives inside and outside the udder on the teat skin. The microorganism 
can cause both clinical and sub-clinical mastitis and spreads the same way as S. 
agalactiae. 
 
Infections caused by coliform bacteria are less common than other types, but can 
cause very severe cases of clinical mastitis. Coliform bacteria are abundant in wet 
bedding materials, manure and polluted water. Coliform mastitis occurs more 
frequently in herds which are relatively free of other types of mastitis infections, are 
housed in unsanitary conditions or milked while the udders are wet.  
 
Detection of Mastitis 
Clinical signs: Mild signs include flakes or clots in the milk and may have slight 
swelling of infected quarter. Severe signs include secretion of abnormal milk: hot, 
swollen quarter or udder; cow may have a fever, loss of appetite, dehydration and 
death may occur. 
 
Strip cup: The strip cup is an important in the milking parlor for determining the 
presence of clinical mastitis. The test is rapid and can easily be adapted as a part of 
74 
milking routine. Few streams of the foremilk are squirted onto the strip cup and are 
visually examined for milk abnormalities. The strip cup test should be conducted on 
every cow at every milking and milk from any cow found to have abnormal milk 
should be withhold from the supply. 
 
California mastitis test: The California Mastitis Test (CMT) estimates the number 
somatic cells present in the milk. 
 
Prevention of Mastitis 
The goal of every mastitis control program is to prevent bacteria from entering a 
normal and healthy mammary gland. This means that each step involved in proper 
milking procedures must occur at each milking every day for each cow in the herd. 
This can be achieved through several ways: 
 
Proper milking hygiene: Bacteria are transmitted from infected to uninfected through 
hands of the milker. Thus the milers’ hands should be washed thoroughly with 
disinfected soaps before milking and clinically infected cows should be milked last. 
Teats should be cleaned and dried before milking. 
 
Milking machine: The machine should function properly by ensuring proper vacuum 
levels (minimal fluctuation) through proper maintenance of vacuum regulator. 
 
Dipping the teats. Teat dipping reduces the rate of new infection substantially.  
Ensure use of suitable disinfectant. 
. 
Dry cow therapy: Effective use of infused antibiotic into each quarter can reduce 
considerably the occurrence of mastitis in dry cows. This treatment is also very 
effective in clearing chronic and subclinical mastitis that are difficult to treat during 
lactation. 
 
Culling of chronic cases:  This clears the reservoirs. 
 
Nutrition: Deficiencies of selenium and vitamin E in feed have been associated with 
increased cases if mastitis. 
 
Cost of Mastitis 
The greatest amount of money lost with mastitis is reduction in milk yield. Increased 
cost is also in from treatment, discarded milk and with chronic mastitis, premature 
culling. Acute cases of mastitis can result in loss of the animal through death. 
 
Milk Fever 
Milk fever is a common metabolic disorder in dairy cattle that generally affects older, 
75 
high producing cows. It may also be referred to as parturient paresis or 
hypocalcaemia.  
 
At the beginning of lactation high yielding cows experience a sudden rise in demand 
for calcium to replace the large amount lost through milk. This may result in great 
decrease in blood calcium if the cow is not able to replenish the calcium fast enough, 
causing a disease called milk fever. 
 
The majority of milk fever cases occur within 48 to 72 hours of calving when 
demand for calcium for milk production exceeds the body’s ability to mobilize 
calcium reserves. Fever is a misnomer as body temperature is usually below normal. 
Low blood calcium interferes with muscle function throughout the body causing 
general weakness, loss of appetite and eventually heart failure. 
 
Signs of Milk Fever 
At first, cow experiences muscle tremors, lack of appetite, and unsteadiness. 
Eventually, cow is unable to rise, body temperature falls, and constipation occurs. 
Cows go down to a sitting position often with a kink in her neck. Death can occur if 
the cow is not treated promptly. 
 
Causes of Milk Fever 
The onset of milk production drains on the animal’s blood calcium levels. If the cow 
is unable to replace this calcium quickly enough due to loss of its ability to mobilize 
reserves of calcium in bone and absorb calcium from the gastrointestinal tract, milk 
fever occurs. Older cows are more susceptible as they produce more milk and are 
unable to replenish calcium quickly.  
 
Prevention of Milk Fever 
Management of the diet can be a valuable aid in preventing milk fever. The key to 
prevention of milk fever is management of a close-up dry cow which should be kept 
on a low calcium diet.  This stimulates their calcium regulatory system to keep the 
blood levels normal by mobilizing the body stores from the bone.  
 
When the demand for calcium increases at calving, calcium can be mobilized much 
more rapidly thus preventing milk fever. Lucerne, a feed high in calcium and 
potassium, should not be a major ingredient in close-up dry cows’ diets. In early 
lactation, high yielding cows should receive as much calcium as possible. High risk 
cows can be injected with Vitamin D3 2-8 days prior to calving. 
76 
Diets providing less than 15gcalcium/cow/day and fed for at least 10 days before 
calving will reduce the incidence of milk fever. 
 
Ketosis 
Ketosis, or acetonaemia, is a metabolic disorder in cattle associated with an 
inadequate supply of the nutrients necessary for the normal carbohydrate and fat 
metabolism that is seen mainly in times of high milk production in early lactation. 
During early lactation, the energy intake is insufficient to meet the energy output in 
milk and the animal is in a negative energy balance. Hypoglycemia (low blood 
sugar) is the major factor involved in the onset and development of clinical signs of 
ketosis. Ketosis affects high producing cows during the first 6-8 weeks of lactation 
when cows are in negative energy balance. 
 
Ketosis occurs when energy intake fails to meet the requirements for high glucose 
production, necessary for mainte-nance and milk lactose production. 
The excessive ketone bodies in the bloodstream come from the breakdown of fat 
when the animal is forced to draw on its bodily reserves for energy. Although the 
metabolism of body fat provides energy for cows, the nervous system is dependent 
on glucose, and the ketones produced as a result of excessive fat metabolism can 
have toxic effects. The excess ketone bodies are eliminated in the urine, milk and 
breath of the animal. 
 
Predisposing factors 
Cows of any age may be affected but the disease appears more common in later 
lactations peaking at about the 4th lactation. Over conditioning at calving has been 
associated with increased incidence of ketosis.  
 
A reduction in the production of propionic acid, the main precursor of glucose in 
ruminants, will result in hypoglycaemia. Hypoglycaemia leads to a mobilization of 
free fatty acids and glycerol from the fat stores. The reduction of propionic acid 
production is usually the result of underfeeding or a reduced feed intake caused by 
in-appetence. The in-appetence may be caused by poor feed quality, sudden 
changes in diet or excessive fatness at calving. 
 
Clinical signs of Ketosis 
In many cases of ketosis, the disease is sub-clinical, with the cow’s performance 
and health compromised, but without obvious clinical signs. The clinical signs of 
ketosis include lack of appetite (refusal to eat even concentrates) and a sudden 
drop in milk output. There is a sweet smell of acetone in the urine, breath and milk. 
77 
 Cows will have raised blood ketone levels and may excrete ketones in urine and 
milk. There is a gradual loss of body condition over several days or even weeks.  
 
Prevention of Ketosis 
Ketosis causes financial loss through lost production and treatment. It may be 
prevented by management strategies that maintain a good appetite and supply 
adequate feed to meet this appetite during the late dry period and immediately after 
calving. These strategies include;  
i. 
Avoid sudden changes in feed type to newly calved animals 
ii. 
Ensure cows in body condition 4.0 or less prior to calving.  
iii. 
Ensure that any health problems that may cause reduced feed intake are 
treated as early as possible. 
 
Acidosis 
Acidosis is a syndrome related to a fermentative disorder of the rumen resulting in 
overproduction of acid resulting in lowering of rumen pH below pH 5.5.  The problem 
is related to feeding management, where the ration has high levels digestible 
carbohydrates and low effective fiber. 
 
 Acidosis commonly occurs when switching from a high fiber to high concentrate diet 
(that is rich in fermentable carbohydrates (starches and sugars)).  Large amounts of 
starch and sugar stimulate bacteria that make lactic acid. In a normal, healthy 
rumen, lactic acid production equals lactic acid use. Large amounts of starch and 
sugar stimulate bacteria that make lactic acid. In this instance, bacteria that normally 
use lactic acid cannot keep up with production. 
 
Lactic acid is about ten times a stronger acid than the other rumen acids and causes 
the rumen pH to decrease.  As the rumen pH drops below 6.0, bacteria that digest 
fiber begin to die depressing fiber digestion.  
 
Causes of Acidiosis 
i. 
Diets very high in readily fermentable carbohydrates and low in roughage 
ii. Very fast switch from high forage to high concentrate. 
iii. Excessive particle size reduction by feeding finely chopped forage 
 
Signs of Acidiosis 
Low milk fat test (one of the end products of fiber digestion (acetate) is a precursor 
of milk fat synthesis).  
78 
Diarrhea (Accumulation of acid causes an influx of water from the tissues into the 
gut resulting in diarrhea. The feces are foamy with gas bubbles. There is an 
appearance of mucin/fibrin casts in feces). 
 
Sore hooves-laminitis 
Endo-toxins resulting from high acid production in the rumen also affect blood 
capillaries in the hoof, causing them to constrict resulting in laminitis. 
 
High levels of acid in the rumen also cause ulcers in the rumen resulting in 
infiltration of bacteria into the blood causing liver abscesses, which are seen at post 
mortem.  
 
Prevention Sore hooves-laminitis 
Good management practices are needed to prevent the predisposing situations from 
occurring.  The root problem must be found and corrected.  
 
Buffers can also be used to prevent drop in rumen pH when high concentrate diets 
are fed. Ensuring presence of effective fiber in the diet promotes production of saliva 
which is a buffer. 
 
Bloat 
Bloat is the abnormal accumulation of gas in the rumen. There are three categories 
of bloat: 
i. 
Frothy bloat which occurs when diets that lead to the formation of a stable 
froth or foam in the rumen are fed. 
ii. 
Free gas bloat caused by diets that lead to excessive gas production 
iii. 
Free gas bloat caused by failure to eructate rumen gases leading to 
accumulation (e.g. esophageal obstruction). 
When bloat occurs, gases cannot escape and they continue to build up causing 
severe distention of the abdomen, compression of the heart and lungs, and 
eventually death. 
 
Predisposing factors 
Bloat is a risk when animals are grazing young, lush pasture, particularly if the 
pasture has high legume content (clover or lucerne). Ruminant animals produce 
large volumes of gas during the normal process of digestion which is either belched 
or passes through the gastrointestinal tract. If anything interferes with the gas 
escape from the rumen, bloat occurs. 
79 
Natural foaming agents in legumes and some rapidly growing grasses cause a 
stable foam to form in the rumen. Gas is trapped in small bubbles in this foam in the 
rumen and the animal cannot belch up the gas. Pressure builds up in the rumen 
causing an obvious swelling on the left side of the body. 
 
Signs of Bloat 
i. 
Animal stops grazing and is reluctant to walk 
ii. 
The left side of abdomen is distended 
iii. 
The animal strains to urinate and defecate 
iv. 
Rapid breathing — mouth may be open with tongue protruding 
v. 
Staggering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevention of Bloat 
Pasture management: Legumes should be introduced into the diet gradually over 
several days. Avoid cows gorging on new pastures by feeding them on other feeds 
before letting them out to graze. Silage, hay or more mature pasture can be used to 
reduce the cow's appetite. 
 
Initially, cows should only be allowed access to the pasture for short periods (one 
hour or so) and monitored closely during grazing and immediately after removal. 
 
Cutting and wilting the pasture for 2 - 3 hours prior to feeding reduces the risk of 
bloat. 
 
Preventative medication: Detergents and anti-foaming agents can be drenched prior 
to grazing. 
 
Treatment 
 A sharp knife can be used to puncture the rumen on the left side of the animal (at 
the farm level as an emergency). 
Fig. 31: Staggering; a sign of bloat in a cow 
80 
Puncturing the rumen with the standard trocar and cannula is a quickest way to 
release the gas which cannot be expelled with a stomach tube. The trocar is used to 
puncture while the canula is left in place to release the gas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internal parasites 
Worms 
Worms are internal parasites found mostly in the digestive system of animals. Eggs 
from the adult worm are passed with the animal’s faeces onto the ground where 
they hatch into larvae and are passed into the animals when they feed on 
contaminated pasture. While within the animal, the larvae develop into adults, lay 
eggs and the cycle is repeated. Some worms will pass through another animal (an 
intermediate host) before getting to the final (definitive) host. 
 
Worms cause several types of damage to the host: 
a) They suck the blood of animals and this may lead to death from anaemia 
(shortage of blood in the body). 
b) They consume nutrients causing deficiencies and leading to poor health, 
growth and production. This is the major negative effect of worms on farm 
animals. 
c) Some worms may block the intestines and small passages in the body 
interfering with movement of food and flow of digestive enzymes. 
d) They cause damage to the cells lining the gut and interfere with production 
of enzymes and absorption of nutrients. 
e) Irritation to cells of the gut may cause diarrhoea and loss of body fluids 
leading to dehydration, abdominal pain (colic) and loss of appetite. 
Worms are generally classified into round and flat worms (see Table 10). 
 
Symptoms of worm infestation: 
Symptoms of worm infestation may not be obvious and can easily be ignored or 
mistaken for other illnesses. They are likely to be most severe during the dry season 
when animals are not well fed. 
Fig. 32: Trocar and cannular 
81 
Non-specific signs include: 
• Lower than expected weight gain and/or weight loss 
• decreased milk production 
• lacks of appetite 
• Poor body condition. 
 
Specific signs include: 
• The animal appears pale around the eyes (anaemia) 
• has a dry, dull coat 
• Animal may appear to be swollen around the jaws owing to accumulation of 
body fluid (referred to as ‘bottle jaw’) 
• In some cases, adult worms or tapeworm segments may be seen in the 
faeces 
• Diarrhea (may be bloody), loss of weight, and death may occur. 
 
Treating worms 
If worm infestation is suspected all animals should treated with broad-spectrum 
dewormers (antihelmintics). For advice on which type of dewormer to use and the 
method of administration, one should consult a veterinarian. 
There are several types of dewormers containing different preparations of 
antihelmintics that can be used to control different types of worms. It is advisable to 
use the correct type of antihelmitic and this is possible through identification of the 
type of worm by taking a sample of the fecal material to a laboratory. 
 
While in doubt, ask the veterinarian for advice on when to deworm, and which type 
of dewormer to use. 
 
Type of worms 
Common worms 
Where found 
Flat worms 
Liver flukes 
Bile ducts (liver) 
  
Tapeworms 
Muscles 
  
Lungworms 
Lungs 
Round worms 
Barberpole worm 
Stomach 
  
Brown stomach worm 
  
  
Small stomach worm or stomach hair worm 
  
  
Thread-necked intestinal worm 
Intestines 
  
Small intestinal worms 
  
  
Hook worms 
  
  
Nodular worms 
  
Table 11. Classification of worms 
82 
Control of worms 
Deworming - routine deworming (every 3 months) is recommended especially at the 
start of the rains. 
83 
CHAPTER 8: RECORDS 
Record keeping is an important activity in any dairy enterprises. Farmers should 
therefore ensure that all farm activities are recorded promptly. Records are important 
to farmers because they can help farmers in many ways such as in making:-  
• 
Management decisions 
• 
Financial accounting 
• 
Identifying problems 
• 
Planning for the future 
• 
Determining whether targets are met 
 
In the dairy enterprise, several types of records are kept by the farmer. For a 
successful operation of a dairy enterprise the following records should be kept by the 
farmer. Pedigree and numbers of each animal kept on the farm, dates of heat periods, 
breeding, pregnancy checks, bulls used, animal health records deworming, 
vaccinations, performance records milk production, growth rates 
 
Good records should have the following characteristics: 
i. 
Easy to update 
ii. 
Easy to understand 
iii. 
Up to date i.e. include the latest event (current) 
iv. 
Easy to access  
v. 
Easily summarised 
 
Several types of records are kept which include: 
i. 
Ancestry or genetic records. These include the maternal and paternal records 
ii. 
Breeding records -sire, date of breeding, pregnancy confirmation, date of 
calving, and particulars of calf. 
iii. 
Veterinary records - disease type, date and treatment 
iv. 
Production - amount of milk (daily, weekly or monthly), butter fat, drying date.  
v. 
Feed records - these could be amount of concentrate fed for pasture grazed 
animals or the totals amount fed for zero grazed animals. 
vi. 
Financial records - all financial transactions should be recorded. 
 
Recording 
Records are important because they give the animal’s ancestry and hence prove 
quality and increase the value of the animal. Records also help farmers in making 
management decisions. Farmers keep mainly two types of records; pedigree 
84 
records which show the ancestry of the animals and performance records. Ancestry 
records are kept by the Kenya stud Book while performance records for dairy cattle 
are kept by Dairy recording services of Kenya (DRSK). 
 
Farmers are encouraged to register their animals with Kenya Stud Book and 
maintain the performance records especially milk, with the Dairy recording services 
of Kenya. 
 
 The following are sample record cards that farmers can keep: 
i. 
Record Card for Daily milk yield 
ii. 
Cow Identification and Health card: 
iii. 
Breeding / Reproduction Card 
iv. 
Calving Record 
Table12. Record Card for Daily Milk Yield 
  
  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8  
Total milk 
Average 
Per day 
Comment 
  
Jan 
AM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
PM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
Feb 
  
AM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
PM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
Mar 
AM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
PM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
Apr 
AM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
PM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
May 
AM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
PM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
Jun 
  
AM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
PM 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
Table 13. Cow Identification and Health Card 
Cow identification 
Health record 
Cow name 
Sire 
Dam 
Date Born 
Illness/Event 
Outcome 
Number 
  
Number 
  
  
  
Breed 
  
Breed 
  
  
  
Birth date 
  
Sire name 
  
  
  
Date animal received 
  
Number 
  
  
  
Source 
  
Breed 
  
  
  
85 
 
Table 14. Breeding / Reproduction Card 
  
Lactation No……………………Date of last calving……….………. 
Date on heat 
  
  
  
  
Service dates 
  
  
  
  
Bull /AI 
  
  
  
  
Breed and owner 
  
  
  
  
Pregnancy check 
Date and result 
  
  
  
  
Date to dry 
  
  
  
  
Date to calve 
  
  
  
  
Table 15. Calving Record 
Birth 
   Weaning 
 12 months 
 Remarks 
Number 
Name 
sex 
ID 
 Date  
 Wt 
  Date 
Wt 
Date 
Wt 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
ID 
86 
87 
CHAPTER 9: LIFE SKILLS 
 
How to manage wounds and fractures 
A wound is a break in the skin, usually caused by a sharp object. Wounds are caused 
accidentally or by parasites and other animals (e.g. fights and bites). When left 
untreated, the exposed tissues may become infected. 
 
Treating a wound involves the following steps: 
i. 
Stop any bleeding. 
ii. 
Clip hair or wool way from the edges of the wound. 
iii. 
Remove all foreign objects. Wash the wound thoroughly with plenty of clean 
water (the water should have been boiled, cooled and salt or a mild antiseptic 
added). 
iv. 
Dry the wound with a clean cloth. 
v. 
Put a wound dressing or antibiotic powder on the wound. 
vi. 
When there are a lot of flies about, use a wound dressing that repels flies or 
kills fly eggs and larvae. 
vii. Encourage wounds to drain and pus to come out by pressure and incision if 
necessary. 
viii. If the wound does not heal, becomes black and smells bad, the dead flesh 
must be cut away. Wash the wound with antiseptic and treat with antibiotic 
powder. 
 
Fractures 
Fractures (usually to the legs) result from falling into holes, falling over heavy farm 
implements  or jumping over fences. For large, heavy animals or fractures where the 
bone breaks high up in the leg it is better to slaughter the animal for meat. For young 
and light animals: 
i. 
Keep the animal quiet and stop it from moving around. 
ii. 
Stop any bleeding. 
iii. 
If the bone has come through the skin, clean the wound and give local 
anaesthesia by injection. 
iv. 
Arrange the leg so that the broken ends of the bone touch in their normal 
positions as far as possible. 
v. 
Tie a piece of wood (a splint) to the leg to keep the bones in position. 
vi. 
Confine the animal to reduce movement during the healing period. 
 
88 
Splints can be also made by dipping strips of cloth in mud and egg white and wrapping 
around the leg. Cover with a strip of tree bark and a fresh goatskin. As it dries, the 
splint will harden and shrink, holding the broken bones together. Check every day that 
the fixing is not too tight. If the leg below the splint is cold or very swollen, loosen the 
fixing and then tighten again carefully, keeping the leg in the same position. Leave the 
splint on for at least 10 –14 days for a young animal or 21–28 days for an adult animal. 
 
Disposing of waste and carcasses 
Before handling a carcass, consider the diseases that can be passed to humans 
(anthrax, brucellosis, rabies, ringworm and mange are the most common ones). If the 
animal died unexpectedly, a post-mortem will reveal the cause of death and guide the 
means of disposal. Post-mortems should be performed by qualified veterinarian.  
If anthrax is suspected the carcass should be burned and no post-mortem should be 
carried out. 
 
How to burn a carcass 
1. 
Dig two trenches (2 m long, 40 cm wide and 40 cm deep) in the form of a 
cross. The trenches will provide oxygen to the fire. 
2. 
Place two iron bars so they lie across one of the trenches. 
3. 
Place strong wooden posts across the bars. 
4. 
Place the carcass and a heap of fuel (wood and straw soaked in waste oil) 
on the wooden posts. 
5. 
Light the fire and burn the carcass. 
 
Disposal by burying 
1. 
Dig a hole 2 m long by 1.5 m wide and 2 m deep. 
2. 
Put the carcass in the hole and cover with soil and logs or large stones to 
stop wild animals or dogs digging it up again. 
89 
90 
Dairy Farmers Training Manual
Dairy Farmers Training Manual  


1 
1: NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT GOALS 
 
1.1. Policies and Strategies Context 
Kenya is reorienting development programs to align policies and strategies with the overarching 
goal of becoming a globally competitive and prosperous nation with a high quality of life by 2030. 
This will be attained through a sustained GDP growth rate of 10% on average annually to create 
wealth and employment. This reorientation is a response to the need to attain goals and targets 
set in vision 2030 development blueprint, Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 
Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP) and to make gains in the 
regional food markets opened with the common regional market integration. Feeding on these 
multi sartorial policies and strategies are several agriculture sector development policies for 
Livestock, Dairy, National Agricultural Research System and National Food Security and Nutrition 
among others. 
 
The development vision of agriculture sector is transformation into innovative, commercially-
oriented, competitive and modern sector with a growth rate of 7% annually to generate an 
additional K.shs. 90 billion increase in the country’s GDP. Within the agriculture sector, dairy sub 
sector valued at over K.Shs. 100 billion worth by 2007 is the single largest component, larger in 
value than horticulture (K.Shs. 65.2 billion) or tea (K.Shs. 46.8 billion). Dairy sub sector is the 
agricultural sub-sector experiencing one of the highest growths, estimated at 3 to 4 % annually 
with contribution to the national GDP estimated at 4%, this being part of 10 to 12% livestock 
contributes and of 40% agriculture contributes.  
 
Milk based enterprises are attractive in Kenya, supporting over 1.8 million smallholder 
households engaged in dairy production. Building on the huge economic prospects of dairy 
production and trade, the dairy policy envisions a competitive dairy industry regionally and 
globally that will develop and promote an efficient and self-sustaining industry. The overarching 
goal of dairy policy is to improve standards of living of Kenyans by ensuring for farmers food 
security and increasing real incomes and productivity. The policy specific objectives for economic 
growth in the 21st century and beyond are: 
 
i. 
To improve the productivity and competitiveness of Kenya’s dairy and dairy products; 
ii. 
To positively contribute to the livelihoods of milk producing households; 
iii. 
To increase domestic consumption of milk and milk products; 
iv. 
To contribute to national  food and nutrition security  
v. 
To transform the dairy industry into a net exporter of dairy animals and products; 
vi. 
To maximize dairy exports in the regional and global markets 
 
2 
vii. 
To re-orient milk processing towards long life dairy products. 
 
1.2. Strategic Goals for the Dairy Master Plan 
The timing of this dairy master plan comes at the expiry of implementation timeframe for 1991 
dairy master plan; at reorientation of country’s development programmes and strategies to attain 
development goals set in the vision 2030 development blueprint and in the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs); and at the entry into common regional market integration. These 
present new challenges and opportunities in the dairy sub sector, necessitating aligning dairy 
development programmes and strategies with the new development aspirations and responding 
to the emerging challenges in order to steer further development in the sub sector.  
 
The masterplan proposes action plans necessary for the transformations, policy changes and 
development strategies needed to further steer dairy development in line with the other national 
development aspirations. The action plans are proposed while remaining aware of, and 
responsive to the emerging challenges. The specific objectives of the analysis are: 
 
i. 
To formulate relevant strategies and programs for the development of the dairy industry 
and design a mechanism for their implementation, monitoring and evaluation by all 
stakeholders while leaving room for the introduction and adoption of new technologies.  
ii. 
Provide the government with sound justification for a more efficient allocation of the 
development and recurrent budget to the sector based on analysis and projections. 
iii. 
Provide a roadmap for public private partnerships and promote such partnerships in order 
to private sector investment in the dairy sector nationally. 
iv. 
Produce simple and clear pragmatic framework and identify tools for implementing 
interventions for impacts in all components of the dairy value chain. 
v. 
Address cross-cutting and cross–sectoral thematic issues of importance in dairy value 
chain development. 
 
 
3 
2: THE DAIRY MASTER PLAN DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 
The development of dairy master plan went through processes of desktop literature review study, 
ground-truthing field survey, information synthesis of and scenario analyses of transformation 
options and consultation with stakeholders in the dairy value chain. These processes informed 
the benchmarking of Kenyan dairy industry transformation and SWOT analysis. 
 
2.1. The Development Processes 
The development of dairy master plan went through four major processes. Firstly, desktop study, 
reviewing the literature and sourcing relevant data from diverse sources, mainly the Ministry of 
Livestock Development and Kenya Dairy Board. Secondly, ground-truthing field survey in major 
dairy producing areas. Thirdly, synthesis of information obtained from the literature and ground-
true-thing field surveys and scenario analyses of transformation options. Fourthly, consultation 
with stakeholders in the dairy value chain about the synthesised information and scenario 
analyses for transformation options. Stakeholders’ consultation were organised at regional levels 
in Eldoret, Nakuru, Nyeri and Mombosa and national level in Nairobi. Two national forums were 
organized to chart the transformation pathway.  
 
Finally the consulting team prepared the dairy master plan strategic actions and implementation 
framework to steer dairy sub sector development to 2030. The strategic action plan is informed by 
the industry situation at national and regional levels and stakeholders’ concerns. The reports of 
dairy sub sector situational analysis and stakeholder consultation forums form first volume of this 
dairy master plan. 
 
2.2. Benchmarking Kenyan Dairy Industry Transformation 
The transformation of Kenyan dairy industry into a globally competitive dairy value chain 
envisaged in the national development goals can be benchmarked to dairy industries in China, 
India and Australia. All these countries have in common with Kenya a low cost, rainfed pasture 
dairy production system. China and India have in common with Kenya dairy sub sector dominated 
by smallholders, strong tradition for dairy consumption and production that is integral part of 
farming systems, growth rate of about 3% annually, rapidly rising per capita milk consumption at 
a doubling rate and increasing milk production through increases in cattle population rather than 
numbers. Australia has in common with Kenya dairy industry contributing significantly to the 
country’s economy.  
 
The projected likely level of growths to occur in per capita milk consumption in China and India 
under “Livestock Revolution’’ phenomenon against realised growth changes in Kenyan and 
Australian dairy industries are illustrated in Table 1. For a time of 20 year period, the per capita 
 
4 
milk consumption in China and India will grow by a factor of 1.7 to 2.0 comparable to Kenyan 
growth rate by a factor 1.7. Over the same length of time period, Australia doubled animal milk 
productivity from 2850 to 5750 litres a year, a growth Kenya can set to achieve. India with 
dominant smallholder milk production and trade do process 38% of total milk produced, 
comparable to 32% in Kenya, but with potential to transform progressively towards the 75% in 
Australian. India has 40 to 50% of total milk produced processed into value added products 
including dairy sweets, ghee and soured milk. 
 
Table 1: Comparative dairy sub sector situation in Australia, China, India and Kenya 
 
Country 
Year 
Dairy pop 
(000) 
Milk prod 
(000 Litres) 
Per capita milk 
(Litres/year) 
Productivity 
(litres/cow/year) 
Milk processed 
(% production) 
Australia 
1990 
1.654 
6,262 
244 
2,850 
 
2009 
1.600 
9,388 
301 
5,750 
75 
% change  
-3.3 
49.9 
23.4 
101.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
China 
1997 
 
 
8 
 
 
2020 
 
 
16 
 
 
% change 
 
 
100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
India 
1997 
 
 
62 
 
 
2020 
 
 
104 
1000 
38  
% change 
 
 
67.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kenya 
1990 
2,369 
2,450 
64 
1440 
 
2009 
3,403 
4,200 
110 
1800 
32 
% change  
43.6 
71.4 
71.9 
25.0 
 
 
 
Growth in milk consumption demand over a 20 year period doubles in India and China, which 
translated for Kenya would be doubling of present 111 litres milk per capita consumption to 220 
litres by 2030. With human population projected to reach 58 million by 2030, the total milk 
demand projects to 12.76 billion litres. With this milk demand, the balance in milk demand and 
supply projected for 2010 to 2030 is illustrated in Figure 1.  
 
Domestic milk supply at medium growth rate (3.5%) and high growth rate (4.2%) suggest that 
demand will continue to outstrip supply by 31.8 to 43.5% for medium growth rate and 16.8 to 
32.8% for high growth rate. Satisfying the 220 litres per capita milk consumption by 2030 requires 
strategic actions to more than double milk productivity if the country is to satisfy the growing milk 
demands from domestic production without unsustainable explosion in population of milking 
animals kept.  
 
5 
 
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
milk (billion litres)
Supply_Medium growth
Supply_High growth
Demand targets
 
Figure 1: The demand and supply milk balance projections from 2010 to 2030 
 
 
 
Table 2 presents the projected milk productivity increases needed. Greatest productivity 
increases will be needed in dairy cattle by 150% and in dairy goats by 115.5% relative to 64% in 
the zebu cattle and 29.9% in camels. These corresponds to an average annual growth rate of 
4.71% in dairy cattle, 3.83% in dairy goats, 2.50% in zebu cattle and 1.32% in camels. These will 
be realised with annual population growth rates of 2.48% for dairy cattle from 3,403,000 to 
5,551,388, 8.85% for dairy goats from 175,000 to 936,268, 2.55% in camels from 1,132,000 to 
1,872,967 and 1.21% for zebu cattle from 10,119,000 to 12,881,958.  
 
Table 2: The projected growths needed between 2010 and 2030 in animal milk productivity in 
litres per year and (litres/day) for attaining per capita milk consumption of 220 litres by 
2030 
 
Year and growth rate 
Dairy cattle 
Dairy goats 
Camels 
Zebu cattle 
2010 
1800      (4.9) 
225         (0.6) 
1440        (4.0) 
250       (0.7) 
2030 
4500      (12.3) 
476         (1.3) 
1870        (5.1) 
410       (1.1) 
Growth rate (%/year) 
4.71 
3.83   
1.32 
2.50 
Percentage change (%) 
150.0       (151.0) 
111.5       (116.7) 
29.9       (27.5) 
64.0      (57.1%) 
 
 
Presently achieved milk productivity in some herds better managed herds utilizing innovations 
adequately, appropriately and efficiently in feeding, health and breeding suggest the productivity 
levels needed are achievable with a transformation in production and trade. There are annual 
milk productivity of 5,285 litres in Friesian, 4,617 litres in Ayrshire, 3402 litres in Guernsey and 
 
6 
3159 litres in Jersey. A wide range in individual animal productivity of 7 to 45 litres for dairy cows, 
4 to 12 litres for camels and 0.35 to 4 litres for dairy goats indicate room for improvement.  
 
 
2.3. SWOT Analysis 
The SWOT analysis conducted with stakeholders identified opportunities that can be exploited in 
the dairy value chain as well as the challenges that limiting exploitation of those opportunities.  
 
2.3.1. Opportunities to Exploit in the Dairy Value Chain 
i. 
A large population of people with long strong tradition for dairy production and 
consumption 
ii. 
A large population of producers and traders investing in dairy, goat and camel milk 
enterprises 
iii. 
A large population of dairy herd 
iv. 
Large feed processing capacity under utilised 
v. 
Increasing investment in feed processing 
vi. 
Established public and private veterinary delivery services 
vii. 
Established breeding services delivery 
viii. 
Research strong on production and productivity  
ix. 
Expanding financial services 
x. 
Well trained extension staff 
xi. 
Functional milk collection systems in some milk producing areas by co-operatives, 
processors and private transporters  
xii. 
Liberalised milk market 
xiii. 
Political support and goodwill 
xiv. 
Expanding domestic and regional market for milk and high value products 
 
2.3.2. Challenges to Exploiting the Opportunities in the Dairy Value Chain 
i. 
Low market orientation in milk production and trade 
ii. 
Low uptake of productivity and market led innovations  
iii. 
Ineffective and inefficient knowledge, information and communication systems needed to 
link knowledge and information from diverse providers and users. 
iv. 
Heavy dependence on donor funding to research in the dairy value chain 
v. 
Inadequate disease diagnostics and surveillance laboratories and equipment facilities   
vi. 
Research is weak on demand and market driven opportunities and emerging challenges. 
vii. 
Weak research linkages with extension and farmers 
viii. 
Inadequate extension staff deployment in post 
 
7 
ix. 
Limited facilities for and inefficiency in collection of quality milk 
x. 
Low processing capacities to absorb glut milk 
xi. 
Weak regulatory service to enforce compliant with quality and safety requirements 
xii. 
Dominance of informal raw fresh milk marketing 
 
 
8 
3: GUIDING PRINCIPLES, VISION AND MISSION 
 
3.1. Guiding Principles 
The national development goals have high priority on transforming subsistence and informal dairy 
production and trading into a sustainable and globally competitive dairy value chain for wealth 
creation and high quality life and in compliant with requirements for high standards of public and 
environmental health. 
 
Priority national development goal is developing efficient and competitive dairy value chain 
depicted in Figure 2.  
 
VC Roles 
Producers 
 
Processors 
 
Retailers 
 
Consumers 
 
Products 
 
 
 
 
Value 
Chain 
Operators 
Pastoralists 
 
Milk bars 
 
Mobile hawkers 
 
Rural households 
 
Raw milk 
Smallholders 
 
Cooperatives 
 
Middlemen 
 
Hotels 
 
Pasteurised 
milk 
Market-oriented 
smallholders 
 
Processors 
 
Milk bars/shops 
 
Urban 
households 
 
Fermented 
milk 
Medium and 
large  farmers  
 
 
 
Cooperatives 
 
Hotels/Tourists 
 
Flavoured 
and cream 
 
 
 
 
Supermarkets 
 
Export markets 
 
Long life 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specialised 
demands 
 
High value 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specialised 
products 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Value 
Chain 
Supporters 
Public,  Private and NGO service providers offering demand driven services 
Research, Extension, Market information, Transport, Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Value 
Chain 
Enablers 
 
 
Framework conditions at regional, national and farm levels enabling private sector  
and value chain development 
Infrastructure, legal and administrative framework conditions, enforcement, political will 
 
Figure 2: Dairy value chain system for competitiveness 
 
 
The national development goal priorities for dairy value chain operators are:  
 
Orientation to profitable dairy business development  
 
Linking smallholder producers and traders to markets and enabling them become 
commercial entrepreneurs 
 
Production of quality and safe products 
 
More value addition and product branding 
 
9 
 
Competitiveness in dairy production and trade 
 
Greater application of market led science, technology and innovations 
 
More exported dairy and milk products 
 
Wealth and employment generation 
 
Reformed policy and rules 
 
The national development goal priorities for dairy value chain supporters are:  
 
Efficient delivery of demand driven Research, Extension, Finance and Market information 
services by public, private and NGOs to chain operators. 
 
The national development goal priorities for dairy value chain enablers are:  
 
Policy and regulation frameworks, infrastructure and enforcement that beneficially work 
for all dairy value chain stakeholders. 
 
3.2. Vision and mission 
 
Vision 
The strategic vision of the Dairy Master Plan of 2010 is: 
To transform milk production and trade into an innovative, commercially oriented 
and globally competitive dairy value chain by 2030. 
 
Mission 
The mission of the Dairy Master Plan of 2010 is: 
To enable the development of sustainable milk production and trade for wealth 
creation and high quality life compliant with high standards of public and 
environmental health 
 
3.3. Impact Indicators for the Action Plan Objectives 
 
Increased productivity and competitiveness 
 
Increased incomes 
 
Increased employment 
 
Greater compliance with requirements for food quality and safety  
 
Greater use of market led innovations 
 
Increased share in the regional milk markets 
 
Reformed policy and regulations 
 
Greater sensitivity to environmental management, conservation and quality 
 
 
10 
4: ACTION PLANS 
 
The master plan will address the challenges in the dairy industry through strategic interventions 
under four action plans: 
1. Improved productivity and competitiveness in dairy value chain operations 
2. Efficient delivery of demand driven Research, Extension, Finance and Market information 
services by public, private and NGOs to chain operators 
3. Policy and regulation frameworks, infrastructure and enforcement that beneficially work 
for all dairy value chain stakeholders. 
4. Mainstreamed cross cutting issues in the dairy value chain to sustain high productivity 
and competitiveness  
 
4. 1. Action Plan 1: Improving Productivity and Competitiveness in the Dairy Value Chain 
Operations 
 
4.1.1. Plan objective 1: Enable milk producers to appropriately/adequately feed their cows 
for increased and efficient milk production  
 
Actions 
1. Train farmers on feeding strategies for improved productivity 
2. Advice farmers to increase acreage of adaptable high yielding and quality pasture and 
fodder varieties 
3. Promote increased utilisation of root and tuber crops in dairy feeding to remain 
insensitive to global price increases in cereal based feeds 
4. Increase bulking of planting materials of Napier grass varieties resistant to head smut 
and stunted diseases  
5. Train farmers, millers and extension staff on feed standard requirements  
6. Train farmers on quality assessment and ration formulation from local feed resources 
7. Popularise to farmers and extension staff on use of local and non conventional quality 
feed resources in TMR formulation 
8. Engage high level lobbying for subsidized fertilizer for farms 
 
 
4.1.2. Plan objective 2: Enable milk producers manage seasonality of feed supply  
 
Actions 
1. Train farmers in simple methods of feed storage and conservation innovations  
2. Train farmers on efficient use of industrial by-products to cover deficits  
3. Popularise small and large scale entrepreneurship in fodder production and trade  
 
11 
4. Revive and expand cotton industry and growing of sunflower and soya bean to increase 
animal feed resources 
5. Research and extension training on better feeding strategies with crop residues 
6. Expand use of meat processing by-products in livestock feeds 
7. Set national strategic animal feed reserves 
8. Provide to farmers early warning on drought and feed pricing indicators 
 
4.1.3. Plan objective 3: Enable milk producers and traders to improve competitiveness and 
profits in milk enterprises 
 
Actions 
1. Promote farmer groups and cooperatives formation and strengthen governance  
2. Up scale and out scale successful models of Dairy Business Development Services in 
the value chain  
3. Facilitate expansion in medium and large scale commercial milk production for 
economies of scale 
4. Assist Cooperative Societies to adopt Dairy Hub Business Development Service models 
in low market access milk producing areas 
5. Train milk producers and traders on safety and quality milk requirements 
6. Facilitate entrepreneurial knowledge and business linkages by dairy value chain 
operators 
7. Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), Constituency Development Funds (CDF) and 
Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) in rural infrastructure to generate off-farm 
remunerative options 
8. Support off-farm investments that will raise rural wages to subsequently remove some 
producers and traders out of subsistence livelihood dairy production and trade 
9. Lobby processors to introduce premium pricing for milk quality 
10. Publicise safety and quality requirements in milk and milk products 
11. Register all milk producers to be members  
12. Establish, revitalise and strengthen vocational training facilities for competitive dairy 
production and trade 
13. Introduce outreach training programmes to spread dissemination of innovations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
4.1.4. Plan objective 4: Manage seasonal milk gluts 
 
Actions 
1. Support private entrepreneurs to invest in expanding milk processing capacity for long life 
and high value products 
2. Process surplus milk into milk powder for re-constitution during dry periods 
3. Establish national milk strategic reserve through public-private partnership contractual 
arrangements to absorb glut milk and stabilise milk prices 
4. Actively assist entrepreneurs to gain access to profitable regional and global milk markets 
5. Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), Constituency Development Funds (CDF) and 
Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) in rural infrastructure to ease distribution of milk 
products to deficit areas in the country 
6. Advocate for inclusion of milk supply in public and NGO food security programmes in 
vulnerable areas through public-private partnership contractual arrangements.  
 
4.1.5. Plan objective 5: Develop breeding objectives and selection criteria for smallholder 
producers’ to embrace commercial approach to milk production 
 
Actions 
1. Train smallholder producers on simple herd recording, book keeping and financial 
planning 
2. Popularise livestock registration and performance recording through Dairy Hub Business  
3. Revitalise the national dairy database platform and processing to improve data quality for 
planning and decision making 
4. Initiate performance recording and genetic improvement in camels 
5. Expand AI processing and distribution infrastructure for efficient delivery of genetics –AI, 
embryo or proven bulls 
6. Promote conservation of indigenous livestock species 
7. Launch incentive rewards to best performing smallholder dairy farms to promote herd 
recording, application of breeding objectives 
8. Implement the animal breeding policy 
9. Strengthen the KLBO roles and functions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
4.2. Action Plan 2: Efficient Delivery of Demand Driven Research, Extension, Finance and 
Market Information Services by Public, Private and NGOs to Chain Operators 
 
4.2.1. Plan objective 1: Building capacity for efficient service delivery 
 
Actions 
1. Institutionalize dairy research funding and prioritization partly from the from the dairy 
value chain  in order to ensure sustained, targeted and demand driven research  
2. Conduct regularly capacity needs of the in post human resource 
3. Accredit research, training and consulting institutions and firms in areas of strengths for 
contracting required services 
4. Expand capacities and quality in vocational training facilities and programmes 
5. Expand outreach programmes 
6. Build capacity in information sharing along the value chain 
7. Engage private sector in designing innovatively flexible financial services for dairy 
producers and traders 
8. Mainstream the dairy master plan actions into departmental performance contracting for 
fast racking implementation and progress 
9. Establish a nation dairy information network desk to build national database  
10. Produce Kenya Dairy Bulletin with two issues yearly reporting research on topical issues 
and informing stakeholders of the industry situation 
 
4.2.2. Plan objective 2:  Improve prevention and control of animal diseases 
 
Actions 
1. Intensify training on effective on-farm bio safety management of diseases of Tick-borne, 
Tran boundary and Intensification 
2. Strengthen control, diagnostic and surveillance facilities for diseases  
3. Rehabilitate, improve and equip laboratory facilities  
4. Facilitate setting up of private laboratories in strategic milk producing regions 
5. Establish satellite laboratories in the dairy productive areas 
6. Enforce animal disease control regulations for movement and product sales 
7. Popularise ethics in drug use quality and safety requirements in marketed milk 
8. Promote private sector participation in animal health delivery services 
9. Recruit appropriate and adequate manpower 
10. Increase funding to public veterinary regulatory services 
 
 
 
14 
4.2.3. Plan objective 3:  Enhance efficiency in milk collection and transportation system 
 
Actions 
1. Revitalise dormant milk co-operative societies. 
2. Promote formation of farmer groups and Co-operative societies to ease logistics in milk 
collection from smallholder farms. 
3. Scale up and out adoption of Dairy Hub Business Development Services Centres in milk 
producing areas with low market access  
4. Introduce standard milk safety and quality tests and certification  
5. Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), Constituency Development Funds (CDF) and 
Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) in rural infrastructure to attract private investments 
milk collection and transportation facilities 
6. Offer regular training in safety and quality requirements in milk collection and 
transportation 
7. Enforce registration and compliance with safety and quality requirements in milk 
collection and transportation  
 
4.2.4. Plan objective 4:  Reduction of post harvest milk losses along the value addition 
chain 
 
Actions 
1. Launch regular training for stakeholders on standard milk safety and quality tests and 
certification procedures 
2. Launch regular mandatory training on Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) for small and 
large scale processors, milk collection and transportation providers 
3. Popularise the application of code of hygienic practice in milk production, handling, and 
distribution, industry regulatory services, milk and milk products standards 
4. Enforce the dairy industry regulations and standards 
5. Regularly report in the Kenya Dairy Bulletin evaluation reports on the rate of compliance 
to standards and regulations by the industry stakeholders’ classification 
6. Enforce mandatory record keeping of the quality of milk received, materials used, new 
product development activities and all inspection reports in milk processing plants. 
7. Promote and encourage processors to attain ISO certification  
8. Engage private and public institutions with laboratories to carry out quality control tests 
on milk 
9. Implement payment based on quality and wholesomeness of milk as incentive to produce 
safe and pure milk. 
 
 
15 
4.2.5. Plan objective 5:  Increase milk value addition and branding 
 
Actions 
1. Assist camel and goat milk producers to brand milk on nutritional health attributes and 
adaptation to climate change for high value specialised markets 
2. Assist producers to brand milk from indigenous cattle and Jersey breed built on unique 
attributes and adaptation to climate change for high value specialised markets 
3. Market promotions of Kenya branded milk in niche markets 
4. Facilitate both small and large processing on basis of compliance with safety and quality, 
GMP and certification requirements 
5. Scale up and out adoption of Dairy Hub Business Development Services Centres in milk 
producing areas with low market access  
6. Introduce standard milk safety and quality tests and certification  
7. Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), Constituency Development Funds (CDF) and 
Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) in rural infrastructure to attract private investments 
milk processing facilities 
8. Establish efficient milk manufacturing plants for processing surplus milk in wet season 
into long life and high value products. 
9. Lobby for policy shift from strategic grain reserve to strategic food reserve programme 
inclusive of milk. 
10. Expand training of small processors on milk value addition and a range of high value 
products 
11. Introduce milk and milk product festivals similar to those cheese festivals ESADA 
organizes to promote consumption. 
 
4.2.6. Plan objective 6: Expand domestic milk consumption 
 
Actions 
1. Run promotional milk consumption campaigns  
2. Popularise use of low cost packages and pouches for packaging of pasteurized milk. 
3. Diversify products range 
4. Advocate for inclusion of milk supply in public and NGO food security programmes in 
vulnerable areas through public-private partnership contractual arrangements.  
 
 
 
 
 
16 
4.2.7. Plan objective 7:  Export more milk and milk products in the regional and global 
markets 
 
Actions 
1. Expand milk processing capacities in low market access high milk producing areas 
2. To re-orient milk processing towards long life and high value dairy products 
3. Engage high level policy negotiations to open regional market for Kenyan milk and milk 
products 
4. Launch regular mandatory training on Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) for small and 
large scale processors, milk collection and transportation providers 
5. Popularise the application of code of hygienic practice in milk production, handling, and 
distribution, industry regulatory services, milk and milk products standards 
 
4.3. Action Plan 3: Policy and regulation frameworks, infrastructure and enforcement that 
beneficially work for all dairy value chain stakeholders. 
 
 
4.3.1. Plan objective 1: Increase quantity and quality of concentrates in the market 
 
Actions 
1. Strengthen existing regulatory services on feed testing at retail level 
2. Impose heavy penalties and sanctions on trade malpractices 
3. Create animal feeds inspectorate unit with legal authority to enforce standard of both raw 
materials and finished product 
4. Enact the Animal Feedstuff Act to strengthen the monitoring of feed quality at the point of 
sale. 
5. Strengthen Association of Kenya Feed Manufacturers (AKEFEMA) and other 
stakeholders in the feed industry for self-regulation in the feed industry  
6. Facilitate e private investors to set up private feed testing labs 
7. Test regularly commercial feeds at factory and stockist levels 
 
4.3.2. Plan objective 2:  Review and harmonize policies, regulations and control 
 
Actions 
1. Revise and strengthen new policies for delivery system: Veterinary Surgeon Act CAP 
366, Cattle cleansing Act CAP 358, Pharmacy and Poisons Act CAP244 
2. Establish stakeholders driven ethics/standards committee 
 
17 
3. Formalise field practice by Community Animal Health Workers on common simple 
attendance cases 
 
4.3.3. Plan objective 3: Design enabling policy and regulation frameworks 
 
Actions  
1. Raise funding to support regular tailor made training for filling skills needs in the dairy 
value chain 
2. Accredit and contract institutions with the technical capacity to offer training on the gap 
skills 
3. Launch Kenya Dairy Bulleting with two issues yearly reporting on topical issues in the 
dairy value chain 
4. Engage public and private organisations with capacity on special dairy technical skills in 
outreach programmes to dairy value chain operators. 
5. Develop policies to guard against monopolistic and oligopoly tendencies 
6. Enhance research funding through formalized public and private sector partnerships 
 
4.3.4. Plan objective 4:  Expand export market for milk and milk products 
 
Actions 
1. Expand processing capacities for long life and high value products 
2. Offer regular trainings on safety and quality requirements for marketed milk and products 
3. Diversify dairy products  
4. Assist processors brand milk and milk products 
5. Enforce compliance with requirements for safety, quality, GMP and code of hygienic 
practice in the dairy value chain 
6. Conduct market research and surveillance in the EAC and COMESA markets 
7. Lobby at high policy levels for removal of non tariff trade barriers 
 
4.4. Action Plan 4: Mainstreaming Cross cutting Issues in the Dairy Value Chain to Sustain 
High Productivity and Competitiveness  
 
4.4.1. Plan objective 1: Mainstream gender in the dairy value chain support 
 
Actions 
1. Develop gender sensitive extension packages 
2. Adopt gender sensitive extension approaches 
 
18 
3. Develop gender sensitive financial services 
4. Develop gender sensitive technologies  
 
4.4.2. Plan objective 2: Improve security to encourage investments in the dairy industry in 
Kenya 
 
Actions 
1. Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), Constituency Development Funds (CDF) and 
Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) in rural infrastructure to generate off-farm 
remunerative options 
2. Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), Constituency Development Funds (CDF) and 
Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) in building police posts where insecurity is high 
3. Popularise in community policing 
 
4.4.3. Plan objective 3: Improve better understanding of climate change implications for 
and adaptation in the dairy industry in Kenya 
 
Actions 
1. Engage stakeholders in climate risks workshops for awareness  
2. Develop regional information sheets on climate change and adaptation strategies 
3. Incorporate climate change issues in extension services 
4. Target climate change workshops to the most vulnerable 
 
 
4.4.4. Plan objective 4:  Enhance mitigation and adaptation to climate change variability 
and change in the dairy industry 
 
Actions 
1. Conduct vulnerability and adaptation of dairy production systems to climate variability and 
change 
2. Conduct feed base audit and systems resilience analysis 
3. Conduct scenario planning analysis to explore options 
4. Inventory of management technologies and practices for dissemination 
5. Promote increased adoption of agro-forestry systems for intensifying, diversifying and 
buffering farm systems 
6. Design and lobby at high policy levels for implementation of insurance buffering 
 
 
19 
4.4.5. Plan objective 5: Improve environmental quality, conservation and management in 
the dairy value chain 
 
Actions 
1. Sensitise dairy producers and traders on maintenance of environmental quality, 
conservation and management 
2. Design incentives for low energy use technologies  
3. Promote mixed dairy-crop production systems 
4. provide extension training on better management of pastures and soils  
5. Promote uptake of biogas plants for cooking, lighting and heating and for manure 
fertilising of pastures and crops 
6. Lobby for incentives in low energy use technologies  
7. Promote mixed dairy-crop production systems 
8. provide extension training on better management of pastures and soils  
9. Provide extension training on feeding for improved productivity 
10. Support research and extension training on better feeding strategies of non cereals feeds 
for improved productivity 
11. Promote uptake of biogas plants for cooking, lighting and heating and for manure 
fertilising of pastures and crops 
 
4.4.6. Plan objective 6: Enable milk producers to improve water use efficiency milk 
production  
 
Actions 
1. Provide training on water harvesting, storage and conservation 
2. Offer training on water use efficiency in drinking and service water use in the dairy value 
chain 
3. Sensitize farmers on water requirements for animals to maximize productivity 
4. Training on importance of quality water for livestock 
5. Popularise water harvesting and water use efficiency in the dairy value chain 
6. Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), Constituency Development Funds (CDF) and 
Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) in water supply services including borehole 
drilling, dam construction and piped water. 
 
 
20 
5: DAIRY MASTERPLAN IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY MATRIX 
The master plan implementation strategy matrix specifies who are responsible, gives 
implementation timeframe and the Monitoring and Evaluation indicators for the progress towards 
achievement of the plan action goals. The four action plans: 
1. Improved productivity and competitiveness in dairy value chain operations 
2. Efficient delivery of demand driven Research, Extension, Finance and Market information 
services by public, private and NGOs to chain operators 
3. Policy and regulation frameworks, infrastructure and enforcement that beneficially work 
for all dairy value chain stakeholders. 
4. Mainstreamed cross cutting issues in the dairy value chain to sustain high productivity 
and competitiveness  
 
5. 1. ACTION PLANS FOR IMPROVING PRODUCTIVITY AND COMPETITIVENESS IN THE 
DAIRY VALUE CHAIN OPERATIONS 
 
5.1.1.  
Plan objective 1: Enable milk producers to feed animals for increased milk 
productivity  
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation 
timeframe term 
M&E Impact 
indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
1. Train farmers on feeding strategies for 
improved productivity 
MoLD, Colleges, 
Universities, NGO, 
Farmer groups, KARI 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
2. Advice farmers to increase acreage of 
adaptable high yielding and quality pasture and 
fodder varieties 
MoLD, Colleges, 
Universities, NGO, 
Farmer groups, KARI 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
3. Promote increased utilisation of root and tuber 
crops in dairy feeding to remain insensitive to 
global price increases in cereal based feeds 
MoLD, Colleges, 
Universities, NGO, 
Farmer groups, 
AKEFEMA, KARI 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
4. Increase bulking of planting materials of Napier 
grass varieties resistant to head smut and stunted 
diseases  
Farmers, MoLD, 
Colleges, Universities, 
NGO, Farmer groups, 
KARI 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
5. Train farmers, millers and extension staff on 
feed standard requirements  
MoLD, Colleges, 
Universities, NGO, 
Farmer groups, 
AKEFEMA, KEBS 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
6. Train farmers on quality assessment and ration 
formulation from local feed resources 
MoLD, Colleges, 
Universities, NGO, 
Farmer groups, 
AKEFEMA, KEBS 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
7. Popularise to farmers and extension staff the 
use of local and non conventional quality feed 
resources in TMR formulation  
MoLD, Colleges, 
Universities, NGO, 
Farmer groups, KARI 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
8. Engage high level lobbying for subsidized 
fertilizer for farms 
MoA, MoLD 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
 
21 
5.1.2. Plan objective 2: Enable milk producers manage seasonality of feed supply  
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E Impact 
indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
1. Train farmers in simple methods of feed 
storage and conservation innovations  
MoLD, Colleges, 
Universities, NGO, 
Farmer groups, KARI 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
2. Train farmers on efficient use of industrial 
by-products to cover deficits  
MoLD, Colleges, 
Universities, NGO, 
Farmer groups, KARI 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
3. Popularise small and large scale 
entrepreneurship in fodder production and 
trade  
MoLD, NGO, Farmer 
groups, KARI, Coops  
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
4. Revive and expand cotton industry and 
growing of sunflower and soya bean to 
increase animal feed resources 
MoA, Cotton Board, 
MoLD, , NGO, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
5. Research and extension training on better 
feeding strategies with crop residues 
KARI, MoLD, NGO, 
Farmer groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Productivity 
incomes 
6. Expand use of meat processing by-
products in livestock feeds 
Farmers, MoLD, 
AKEFEMA, KEBS 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
7. Set national strategic animal feed 
reserves 
MoLD, KDB 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
8. Provide to farmers early warning on 
drought and feed pricing indicators 
MoA KARI, MoLD, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
5.1.3. 
Plan objective 3: Enable milk producers and traders to improve competitiveness 
and profits in milk enterprises 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E Impact indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Promote farmer groups and cooperatives 
formation and strengthen governance  
MoCD, , MoLD, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Up scale and out scale successful models of 
Dairy Business Development Services in the 
value chain  
MoCD, , MoLD, NGO, 
KDB, Farmer groups, 
Coops 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and safety 
market led innovations 
Facilitate expansion in medium and large 
scale commercial milk production for 
economies of scale 
MoCD,  MoLD, NGO, 
KDB 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and safety 
market led innovations 
Assist Cooperative Societies to adopt Dairy 
Hub Business Development Service models 
in low market access milk producing areas 
MoCD,  MoLD, NGO, 
KDB 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and safety 
market led innovations 
Train milk producers and traders on safety 
and quality milk requirements 
MoLD, NGO, KDB, 
Colleges, KARI 
Universities, NGO, 
Farmer groups,  
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and safety 
market led innovations 
Facilitate entrepreneurial knowledge and 
business linkages by dairy value chain 
operators 
All dairy value chain 
actors,  
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and safety 
market led innovations 
 
22 
Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), 
Constituency Development Funds (CDF) 
and Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) 
in rural infrastructure to generate off-farm 
remunerative options 
MoCD, , MoLD, NGO, 
KDB, Farmer groups, 
Coops 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and safety 
market led innovations 
Support off-farm investments that will raise 
rural wages to subsequently remove some 
producers and traders out of subsistence 
livelihood dairy production and trade 
MoCD, MoLD, NGO, 
KDB, Farmer groups, 
Coops 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and safety 
market led innovations 
Lobby processors to introduce premium 
pricing for milk quality 
MoCD, , MoLD, NGO, 
KDB, Farmer groups, 
Coops 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Publicise safety and quality requirements in 
milk and milk products 
MoCD, , MoLD, NGO, 
KDB, Farmer groups, 
Coops, Colleges, KARI, 
Universities, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and safety 
market led innovations 
Register all milk producers to be members  
MoLD, KDB, Farmer 
groups, Coops, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and safety 
Establish, revitalise and strengthen 
vocational training facilities for competitive 
dairy production and trade 
MoCD, MoLD, NGO, 
KDB,  
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and safety 
market led innovations 
Introduce outreach training programmes to 
spread dissemination of innovations 
Farmer groups, Coops, 
Colleges, KARI, 
Universities, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and safety 
market led innovations 
 
 
5.1.4. Plan objective 4: Manage seasonal milk gluts 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E Impact 
indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Support private entrepreneurs to invest in 
expanding milk processing capacity for long 
life and high value products 
MoCD, MoLD, KDB, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and 
safety 
market led 
innovations 
Process surplus milk into milk powder for re-
constitution during dry periods 
Processors, MoCD, , 
MoLD, KDB, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk quality and 
safety 
market led 
innovations 
Establish national milk strategic reserve 
through public-private partnership 
contractual arrangements to absorb glut milk 
and stabilise milk prices 
MoA, MoCD,  MoLD,  
KDB, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
Actively assist entrepreneurs to gain access 
to profitable regional and global milk 
markets 
MoCD,  MoLD,  KDB, 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Milk quality and 
safety 
Market led 
innovations 
 
23 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), 
Constituency Development Funds (CDF) 
and Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) 
in rural infrastructure to ease distribution of 
milk products to deficit areas in the country 
MoA, MoCD,  MoLD,  
KDB, Farmer groups, 
Coops, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
Advocate for inclusion of milk supply in 
public and NGO food security programmes 
in vulnerable areas through public-private 
partnership contractual arrangements.  
MoA, MoCD,  MoLD,  
KDB, Farmer groups, 
Coops, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
 
5.1.5. Plan objective 5: Develop breeding objectives and selection criteria for smallholder 
producers’ to embrace commercial approach to milk production 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E Impact 
indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Train smallholder producers on simple herd 
recording, book keeping and financial 
planning 
MoLD,  KDB, Farmer 
groups, Coops, NGO  
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Popularise livestock registration and 
performance recording through Dairy Hub 
Business  
MoLD,  KDB, Farmer 
groups, Coops, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Revitalise the national dairy database 
platform and processing to improve data 
quality for planning and decision making 
MoLD,  KDB, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Initiate performance recording and genetic 
improvement in camels 
MoLD,  KDB, Farmer 
groups, Coops, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Expand AI processing and distribution 
infrastructure for efficient delivery of 
genetics –AI, embryo or proven bulls 
MoLD,  KDB,  
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Promote conservation of indigenous 
livestock species 
MoLD, NGO, Farmer 
groups, Coops, 
Colleges, KARI, 
Universities, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market led 
innovations 
Launch incentive rewards to best performing 
smallholder dairy farms to promote herd 
recording, application of breeding objectives 
MoCD, , MoLD, KDB, 
Farmer groups, Coops,  
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Implement the animal breeding policy 
MoLD, Farmer groups,  
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Strengthen the KLBO roles and functions 
MoLD, Farmer groups, 
Coops, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
24 
5.2.  
ACTION PLANS FOR EFFICIENT DELIVERY OF DEMAND DRIVEN RESEARCH, 
EXTENSION, FINANCE AND MARKET INFORMATION SERVICES BY PUBLIC, 
PRIVATE AND NGOS TO CHAIN OPERATORS 
 
5.2.1.Plan objective 1: Building capacity for efficient service delivery 
 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E Impact 
indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Raise research funds from the dairy value 
chain operations to support targeted 
demand driven research  
MoLD, KDB, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market led 
innovations 
Conduct regularly capacity needs of the in 
post human resource 
MoLD, KDB, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market led 
innovations 
Accredit research, training and consulting 
institutions and firms in areas of strengths 
for contracting required services 
MoLD, KDB 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market led 
innovations 
Expand capacities and quality in vocational 
training facilities and programmes 
MoLD, KDB 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market led 
innovations 
Expand outreach programmes 
MoLD, NGO, Farmer 
groups, Coops, 
Colleges, KARI, 
Universities, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market led 
innovations 
Build capacity in information sharing along 
the value chain 
MoLD, KDB, KARI, 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market led 
innovations 
Engage private sector in designing 
innovatively flexible financial services for 
dairy producers and traders 
MoLD, KDB 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market led 
innovations 
Mainstream the dairy master plan actions 
into departmental performance contracting 
for fast racking implementation and progress 
MoLD, KDB, MoCD, 
KARI 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market led 
innovations 
Establish a nation dairy information network 
desk to build national database  
KDB 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market led 
innovations 
Produce Kenya Dairy Bulletin with two 
issues yearly reporting research on topical 
issues and informing stakeholders of the 
industry situation 
KDB 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market led 
innovations 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
5.2.2. Plan objective 2:  Improve prevention and control of animal diseases 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E Impact 
indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Intensify training on effective on-farm bio 
safety management of diseases of Tick-
borne, Tran boundary and Intensification 
MoLD, KARI, 
Universities, Colleges, 
Private Veterinary Firms 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Strengthen control, diagnostic and 
surveillance facilities for diseases  
MoLD, KARI, 
Universities, Colleges, 
Private Veterinary Firms, 
Farmers, NGO 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Rehabilitate, improve and equip laboratory 
facilities  
MoLD, KARI, 
Universities, Colleges, 
Private Veterinary Firms, 
 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Facilitate setting up of private laboratories in 
strategic milk producing regions 
MoLD, KDB 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Establish satellite laboratories in the dairy 
productive areas 
MoLD, KDB 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Enforce animal disease control regulations 
for movement and product sales 
MoLD 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Popularise ethics in drug use quality and 
safety requirements in marketed milk 
MoLD,  KARI, KDB, 
Universities, Colleges, 
Private Veterinary Firms, 
Farmers, NGO 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Promote private sector participation in 
animal health delivery services 
MoLD 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Recruit appropriate and adequate 
manpower 
MoLD, KDB, MoCD 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Increase funding to public veterinary 
MoLD 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
 
26 
regulatory services 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
 
 
5.2.3. Plan objective 3:  Enhance efficiency in milk collection and transportation system 
 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E Impact 
indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Revitalise dormant milk co-operative 
societies. 
MoLD, KDB, MoCD, 
Farmer groups, Coops, 
NGO,  
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Promote formation of farmer groups and Co-
operative societies to ease logistics in milk 
collection from smallholder farms. 
MoLD, KDB, MoCD, 
Farmer groups, Coops, 
NGO, 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Scale up and out adoption of Dairy Hub 
Business Development Services Centres in 
milk producing areas with low market access 
MoLD, KDB, MoCD, 
Farmer groups, Coops, 
NGO, 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Introduce standard milk safety and quality 
tests and certification  
KDB, KEBS 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), 
Constituency Development Funds (CDF) 
and Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) 
in rural infrastructure to attract private 
investments milk collection and 
transportation facilities 
MoA, MoCD,  MoLD,  
KDB, Farmer groups, 
Coops, NGO 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Offer regular training in safety and quality 
requirements in milk collection and 
transportation 
MoLD,  KDB, KEBS, 
Universities, Colleges, 
groups, Coops, NGO 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
Enforce registration and compliance with 
safety and quality requirements in milk 
collection and transportation  
KDB, KEBS 
 
 
 
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Milk safety and 
quality 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
5.2.4. Plan objective 4:  Reduction of post harvest milk losses along the value addition 
chain 
 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E Impact 
indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Launch regular training for stakeholders on 
standard milk safety and quality tests and 
certification procedures 
MoLD,  KDB,  
Universities, Colleges, 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Milk safety and 
quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Launch regular mandatory training on Good 
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) for small and 
large scale processors, milk collection and 
transportation providers 
KDB   
 
 
 
Milk safety and 
quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Popularise the application of code of 
hygienic practice in milk production, 
handling, and distribution, industry 
regulatory services, milk and milk products 
standards 
MoLD,  KDB,  
Universities, Colleges, 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Milk safety and 
quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Enforce the dairy industry regulations and 
standards 
MoLD,  KDB,  KEBS 
 
 
 
Milk safety and 
quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Regularly report in the Kenya Dairy Bulletin 
evaluation reports on the rate of compliance 
to standards and regulations by the industry 
stakeholders’ classification 
KDB, MoLD,  KEBS 
 
 
 
Milk safety and 
quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Enforce mandatory record keeping of the 
quality of milk received, materials used, new 
product development activities and all 
inspection reports in milk processing plants. 
 
KDB, MoLD 
 
 
 
Milk safety and 
quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Promote and encourage processors to attain 
ISO certification  
KDB, MoLD,  KEBS 
 
 
 
Milk safety and 
quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Engage private and public institutions with 
laboratories to carry out quality control tests 
on milk 
KDB, MoLD,  KEBS, 
Universities, Colleges, 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Milk safety and 
quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Implement payment based on quality and 
wholesomeness of milk as incentive to 
produce safe and pure milk. 
KDB, MoLD, 
Processors, MoCD 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
28 
5.2.5.Plan objective 5:  Increase milk value addition and branding 
 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E Impact 
indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Assist camel and goat milk producers to 
brand milk on nutritional health attributes 
and adaptation to climate change for high 
value specialised markets 
KDB, MoLD,  KEBS, 
NGO, Farmer groups, 
Coops 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Assist producers to brand milk from 
indigenous cattle and Jersey breed built on 
unique attributes and adaptation to climate 
change for high value specialised markets 
KDB, MoLD,  KEBS, 
NGO, Farmer groups, 
Coops 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Market promotions of Kenya branded milk in 
niche markets 
KDB, MoLD,   
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Facilitate both small and large processing on 
basis of compliance with safety and quality, 
GMP and certification requirements 
KDB, MoLD, MoCD 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Scale up and out adoption of Dairy Hub 
Business Development Services Centres in 
milk producing areas with low market access 
KDB, MoLD,  NGO, 
Farmer groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Introduce standard milk safety and quality 
tests and certification  
KDB, MoLD,  KEBS, 
Processors 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), 
Constituency Development Funds (CDF) 
and Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) 
in rural infrastructure to attract private 
investments milk processing facilities 
MoA, MoCD,  MoLD,  
KDB, Farmer groups, 
Coops, NGO 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Establish efficient milk manufacturing plants 
for processing surplus milk in wet season 
into long life and high value products. 
Processors 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Lobby for policy shift from strategic grain 
reserve to strategic food reserve programme 
inclusive of milk 
MoA, MoCD,  MoLD,  
KDB, Farmer groups, 
Coops, NGO 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Expand training to small processors on milk 
value addition and a range of high value 
products 
MoCD,  MoLD,  KDB, 
Farmer groups, Coops, 
NGO 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Introduce milk and milk product festivals 
similar to those cheese festivals ESADA 
MoCD,  MoLD,  KDB, 
Farmer groups, Coops, 
NGO 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
 
29 
organizes to promote consumption. 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
 
5.2.6. Plan objective 6: Expand domestic milk consumption 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E Impact 
indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Run promotional milk consumption 
campaigns  
MoCD,  MoLD,  KDB, 
Farmer groups, Coops, 
NGO, Processors 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Popularise use of low cost packages and 
pouches for packaging of pasteurized milk. 
MoCD,  MoLD,  KDB, 
Farmer groups, Coops, 
NGO, Processors 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Diversify products range 
Processors 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Advocate for inclusion of milk supply in 
public and NGO food security programmes 
in vulnerable areas through public-private 
partnership contractual arrangements. 
MoCD,  MoLD,  KDB, 
Farmer groups, Coops, 
NGO 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
5.2.7.Plan objective 7:  Export more milk and milk products in the regional and global 
markets 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E Impact 
indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Expand milk processing capacities in low 
market access high milk producing areas 
MoCD,  MoLD,  KDB, 
Farmer groups, Coops, 
NGO 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
To re-orient milk processing towards long 
life and high value dairy products 
KDB, Processors, 
Farmer groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Engage high level policy negotiations to 
open regional market for Kenyan milk and 
milk products 
MoCD,  MoLD,  KDB, 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Launch regular mandatory training on Good 
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) for small and 
large scale processors, milk collection and 
transportation providers 
MoCD,  MoLD,  KDB, 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Popularise code of hygienic practice in milk 
production, handling, and distribution, 
industry regulatory services, milk and milk 
products standards 
MoLD,  KDB, 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
30 
5.3. ACTION PLANS FOR POLICY AND REGULATION FRAMEWORKS, INFRASTRUCTURE 
AND ENFORCEMENT THAT BENEFICIALLY WORK FOR ALL DAIRY VALUE CHAIN 
STAKEHOLDERS 
 
 
5.3.1.Plan objective 1: Increase quantity and quality of concentrates in the market 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Strengthen existing regulatory services on 
feed testing at retail level 
MoLD, KEBs, 
AKEFEMA, 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Impose heavy penalties and sanctions on 
trade malpractices 
MoLD, KEBs, 
AKEFEMA, 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Create animal feeds inspectorate unit with 
legal authority to enforce standard of both 
raw materials and finished product 
MoLD, KEBs, 
AKEFEMA, 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Enact the Animal Feedstuff Act to 
strengthen the monitoring of feed quality at 
the point of sale. 
MoLD, AKEFEMA, 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Strengthen Association of Kenya Feed 
Manufacturers (AKEFEMA) and other 
stakeholders in the feed industry for self-
regulation in the feed industry  
MoLD, KEBs,  
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Facilitate private investors to set up private 
feed testing labs 
MoLD, KEBs, 
AKEFEMA, 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Test regularly commercial feeds at factory 
and stockist levels 
MoLD, KEBs, 
AKEFEMA, 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
5.3.2. Plan objective 2:  Review and harmonize policies, regulations and control 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Revise and strengthen new policies for 
delivery system: Veterinary Surgeon Act 
CAP 366, Cattle cleansing Act CAP 358, 
Pharmacy and Poisons Act CAP244 
MoLD 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Establish stakeholders driven 
ethics/standards committee 
All stakeholders 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Formalise field practice by Community 
Animal Health Workers on common simple 
attendance cases 
MoLD 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
 
5.3.3. Plan objective 3: Design enabling policy and regulation frameworks 
 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Raise funding to support regular tailor made 
training for filling skills needs in the dairy 
value chain 
KDB 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Accredit and contract institutions with the 
technical capacity to offer training on the 
gap skills 
KDB, MoLD, MoCD, 
KEBS 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Launch Kenya Dairy Bulleting with two 
issues yearly reporting on topical issues in 
the dairy value chain 
KDB 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Engage public and private organisations 
with capacity on special dairy technical skills 
in outreach programmes to dairy value chain 
operators 
KDB, MoLD, MoCD, 
KEBS 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Develop policies to guard against 
monopolistic and oligopoly tendencies 
KDB, MoLD, MoCD, 
Farmer groups, 
Processors, Coops 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
 
32 
Incomes 
Employments 
Enhance research funding through 
formalized public and private sector 
partnerships 
KDB, MoLD, MoCD, 
Farmer groups, 
Processors, Coops 
 
 
 
Reformed policy and 
regulations 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
5.3.4. Plan objective 4:  Expand export market for milk and milk products 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Expand processing capacities for long life 
and high value products 
Processors, Farmer 
groups, Coops, KDB, 
MoLD, MoCD 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Offer regular trainings on safety and quality 
requirements for marketed milk and 
products 
Processors, Farmer 
groups, Coops, KDB, 
MoLD, MoCD 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Diversify dairy products  
Processors, Farmer 
groups, Coops, KDB,  
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Assist processors brand milk and milk 
products 
KDB, MoLD, MoCD 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Enforce compliance with requirements for 
safety, quality, GMP and code of hygienic 
practice in the dairy value chain 
Processors, Farmer 
groups, Coops, KDB, 
MoLD, MoCD 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Conduct market research and surveillance in 
the EAC and COMESA markets 
KDB, MoLD, MoCD 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Lobby at high policy levels for removal of 
non tariff trade barriers 
Processors, Farmer 
groups, Coops, KDB, 
MoLD, MoCD 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
5.4. ACTION PLANS FOR MAINSTREAMING CROSS CUTTING ISSUES IN THE DAIRY 
VALUE CHAIN TO SUSTAIN HIGH PRODUCTIVITY AND COMPETITIVENESS  
 
5.4.1. Plan objective 1: Mainstream gender in the dairy value chain support 
 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Develop gender sensitive extension 
packages 
MoLD, Universities, 
Colleges, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Adopt gender sensitive extension 
approaches 
MoLD, Universities, 
Colleges, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Develop gender sensitive financial services 
Financial service 
providers, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Develop gender sensitive technologies  
MoLD, Universities, 
Colleges, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
5.4.2.Plan objective 2: Improve security to encourage investments in the dairy industry in 
Kenya 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), 
Constituency Development Funds (CDF) 
and Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) 
in rural infrastructure to generate off-farm 
remunerative options 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), 
Constituency Development Funds (CDF) 
and Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) 
in building police posts where insecurity is 
high 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Milk safety, quality  
Milk exported 
regional markets 
Incomes 
Employments 
Popularise in community policing 
All stakeholders 
 
 
 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
5.4.3.Plan objective 3: Improve better understanding of climate change implications for 
and adaptation in the dairy industry in Kenya 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Engage stakeholders in climate risks 
workshops for awareness  
All stakeholders 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Develop regional information sheets on 
climate change and adaptation strategies 
All stakeholders 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
 
34 
Employments 
Incorporate climate change issues in 
extension services 
All stakeholders 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Target climate change workshops to the 
most vulnerable 
All stakeholders 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
5.4.4.Plan objective 4:  Enhance mitigation and adaptation to climate change variability 
and change in the dairy industry 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Conduct vulnerability and adaptation of dairy 
production systems to climate variability and 
change 
MoLD, Universities, 
KARI, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Conduct feed base audit and systems 
resilience analysis 
MoLD, Universities, 
KARI, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Conduct scenario planning analysis to 
explore options 
Universities, KARI, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Inventory of management technologies and 
practices for dissemination 
MoLD, Universities, 
KARI, NGO 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Promote increased adoption of agro forestry 
systems for intensifying, diversifying and 
buffering farm systems 
MoLD, Universities, 
KARI, NGO, Farmer 
groups 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Design and lobby at high policy levels for 
implementation of insurance buffering 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
 
5.4.5. Plan objective 5: Improve environmental quality, conservation and management in 
the dairy value chain 
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Sensitise dairy producers and traders on 
maintenance of environmental quality, 
conservation and management 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Design incentives for low energy use 
technologies  
MoLD 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Promote mixed dairy-crop production 
systems 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
35 
Provide extension training on better 
management of pastures and soils  
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Promote uptake of biogas plants for cooking, 
lighting and heating and for manure 
fertilising of pastures and crops 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Lobby for incentives in low energy use 
technologies  
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Promote mixed dairy-crop production 
systems 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Provide extension training on better 
management of pastures and soils  
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Provide extension training on feeding for 
improved productivity 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Support research and extension training on 
better feeding strategies of non cereals 
seeds for improved productivity 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Promote uptake of biogas plants for cooking, 
lighting and heating and for manure 
fertilising of pastures and crops 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
5.4.6.Plan objective 6: Enable milk producers to improve water use efficiency milk 
production  
Actions 
Responsibility 
Implementation timeframe 
term 
M&E indicators 
Short  
Medium 
Long 
Provide training on water harvesting, quality, 
storage and conservation 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Provide training on water use efficiency in 
drinking and service in the dairy value chain 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Sensitize farmers on water requirements for 
animals to maximize productivity 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Training on importance of quality water for 
livestock 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
 
36 
Incomes 
Employments 
Popularise water harvesting and water use 
efficiency in the dairy value chain 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
Invest economic stimulus funds (ESF), 
Constituency Development Funds (CDF) 
and Local Authority Transfer funds (LATIF) 
in water supply services including borehole 
drilling, dam construction and piped water. 
MoLD, MoA, Farmer 
groups, Coops 
 
 
 
Environmental 
quality 
Productivity 
Incomes 
Employments 
 
 
 
37 
APPENDIX 1: THE ACTORS IN THE DAIRY VALUE CHAIN IN KENYA 
 
The strategic vision and mission of this dairy master plan is to develop a sustainable and globally 
competitive dairy value chain for wealth creation and high quality life while maintaining 
compliance with requirements for high standards of public and environmental health. A value 
chain is a series of sequential activities that add more value to the product at each step in the 
process that the product passes through. Figure 1 depicts the distinct steps in the Kenyan dairy 
value chain. They include Input and service providers; Milk producers; Collection, Chilling and 
Bulking group; Processors; Retailers and Distributors; and Consumers. Input and service 
providers include public and private sector players. They provide a range of services including 
feed supply, veterinary and AI services, breeding stock, extension services, testing and regulatory 
services. Access to these services is crucial to efficient functioning of a dairy value chain, 
especially for smallholder producers and traders.  
 
 
 
 
38 
Dairy Value Chain
Consumers
Transport
Bulking \ Chilling
Processing
Markets
Production
FARMERS
Service Providers
Veterinary
Extension Agents
Technicians
Finance\Consultants
Input Suppliers
Feeds / Supplements
Fertilizers
Informal 
Traders
Milk Sheds
Coolers
Co-operatives
Private
Individual / Group
Retail
Supermarkets
Chain stores
Shops Kiosks
Export
Traders
                              Formal Channels
Informal Channels
Human
Bicycle
Donkey
Vehicle
Export 
Domestic
CONSUMERS
 
 
 
 
39 
 
APPENDIX 2: PROJECTED SHIFTS IN THE PROPORTION OF MILK MARKETED THROUGH 
MARKETING OUTLETS TO 2030 
 
Based on the 2005 estimated milk volumes and proportion through each channels, the 2010 
situation is projected and on their basis to set targets for 2030. The un-shaded values represent 
the present share of milk marketed through each channel and the shaded values represent the 
targets for changes by 2030. Presently the proportion of milk production marketed is 65% leaving 
35% for home consumption. Of the 2.925 billion litres of milk marketed, 45% (1.316 billion litres) 
is handled in the formal market or through the processors. The remaining 55% (1.609 billion 
litres) is handled in informal market outlets dominated by hawkers. The targeted action is to shift 
the proportion of marketed milk in the informal market outlet from 55% in 2010 to 35% (3.350 
billion litres) in 2030. The shift targeted is reducing from 35% (1.575 billion litres) in 2010 to 20% 
(2.552 billion) in 2030 for milk consumed at home of the total production, in order to shift milk 
through markets from 65% in 2010 to 75% (9.57billion litres) in 2030.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Farm milk production 
4.5 billion litres                                       12.76 billion 
litres 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65% 
75% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35% 
25% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Milk marketed 
 
 
 
 
 
Milk consumed at 
home 
 
 
Consumers 
Co-ops  
Traders  
Hotels/Shops 
Processors 
 
 
Family 
(27%) 
Calf (8%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16% 
8% 
 
42% 
32% 
7% 
35% 
27% 
15% 
 
8% 
10% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-ops 
(28%) 
21% 
Traders 
(8%)  
4% 
Hotels/Shops 
(6%) 
 2% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17% 
10% 
25% 
22% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Processors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33% 
 
18% 
 
 
32% 
57% 
 
27% 
15% 
 
8% 
10% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Domestic marketed consumption 
65% to 73 
 
Family 
consumption 
27%  to  17% 
Calf 
consumption 
8%   to   10% 

Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Section 1
Introduction: Concepts,
methods and rationale
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Introduction
This easy-to-use guide to effective targeting of selected dairy interventions in Kenya is intended for use by anyone involved 
in dairy farming in the country, such as development planners, researchers, service providers, suppliers of dairy inputs 
and extension workers. The guide answers the question often faced by these workers: where is their proposed intervention 
most likely to be adopted? 
Using a combination of Geographical Information Systems (GIS) mapping methods and economic regression techniques, 
this guide shows where and under what circumstances dairy technologies are most likely to succeed.
Structure of the guide
The guide is divided into three sections. The first section deals with concepts, rationale and methodologies for targeting 
dairy interventions. It also explains, with examples, how to use the guide. 
The second section presents the targeting maps for various dairy interventions. A total of eleven dairy interventions are 
considered in this guide. For each, a map shows relative probability of adoption together with a description of the innovation 
and background information. Also presented are the socio-economic, biophysical and agro-climatic characteristics that 
predispose uptake of each intervention.
The third section presents some policy-relevant research results in three topical areas: 
• Cost of milk production 
• Evaluation and assessment of alternative milk preservation techniques 
• Employment generation in the dairy marketing chain. 
What is targeting of interventions?
Targeting of interventions involves the systematic identification of domains where the probability of adoption is high 
and where promotional efforts can most effectively be focused. Targeting can be based on various approaches, such as 
identification of sub-populations of people, but this guide is based on identification of geographical areas. It uses spatial 
data to predict the likelihood of adoption of innovations by individual decision makers, i.e. farmers.
Effective targeting by geographical area requires four key questions to be answered: 
• Can the intervention work in this area?
• Is there demand for the intervention in this area? 
• What is the probability of adoption in this area?
• If the intervention is adopted, what impact will be achieved? 
Impact is created when the intervention solves existing significant constraints faced by the farmers or creates new 
opportunities, and thus contributes to enhanced productivity and profitability which can alleviate poverty – by providing 
cash income or improving household nutritional status. Potential uptake of innovation is expressed in the form of 
probabilities: where probability is estimated at 30%, it means that on average 30 out of every 100 farmers in the defined 
domain will adopt the intervention once it is disseminated. 
1
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Why targeting is important
Effective targeting increases the success rate of dairy development interventions. People involved in dissemination activities 
- whether from the public or private sectors - want to be assured that their efforts and investments in dissemination activities 
will result in adoption and create the required impact. In this guide, targeting matches selected dairy interventions with 
the geographical areas to which they are most suited and where impacts will be greatest. 
Likelihood of adoption is affected by geo-spatial factors, such as annual precipitation and temperatures, human population 
density, and socio-economic factors, such as household incomes, labour availability, experience and education of the 
household head, size of land and market access amongst others. These socioeconomic factors (such as wealth, scale of 
operation, age of farmer, degree of intensification, ethnicity, or economic viability of enterprise) can be used to target 
better agricultural interventions and improve distribution of impacts. The inclusion of social and economic factors helps 
to addresses the questions of where interventions can make a major contribution to alleviating poverty in ways that are 
socially equitable, ecologically sound and economically efficient. For example, concentration of intensive dairying beyond 
a certain point can cause harmful nutrient loading and targeting can help create an appropriate balance of crop-dairy 
systems (Utiger et al., 2000, de Haan et al., 1997). Many development projects are applying these approaches for targeting 
pro-poor investments and other equity considerations: Baltenweck et al., (2005) for example, use spatial and non-spatial 
targeting approaches to introduce pro-poor approaches in a project funded by the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD) in Kenya. 
Approaches to targeting
Depending on the availability of data and information, two approaches to targeting are possible: observation-based and 
criteria-based. 
Observation-based targeting
This involved observing where a particular innovation has been adopted, plotting these sites on a map and identifying 
which common characteristics the sites share. Targeting of the intervention can then be directed to other areas that share 
these same characteristics. 
The method of observation based technology mapping has been described by (Staal et al., 2002) and follows these steps:
1. Household and other characteristics from survey data and GIS derived data are used in a statistical model (see logistic 
regression model described in appendix 1) to predict adoption of the dairy technology. This model identifies significant 
characteristics of adopting farmers and uses this to predict probability of adoption. NB: Traditional technology adoption 
models often use only survey-derived data for all variables, some of which are difficult to interpret and cannot be usefully 
mapped. Often representative numbers are used for variables such as district. 
2. Having predicted the model with GIS and survey data, we predict a second model using only the significant GIS-
derived variables, with all other survey factors held constant at their mean. The two models have been compared and found 
to be more or less the same in explanatory and predictive power. However, the second model, given its variable GIS data, 
can be used for spatial prediction of adoption.     
3. This second model is mapped.
2
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
The following example illustrates how this can be done for adoption of Napier grass as a fodder crop.
STEP 2: Since only variables for which GIS surfaces are available can be used to make
spatial predictions, we compare complete models where both significant GIS and
survey variables are allowed to change and models where only significant GIS
variables are allowed to vary (all other variables being held constant at their mean).
These two approaches are found to have similar predictive powers
STEP 1:  Where has Napier been
adopted? Characteristics from survey
and GIS data are used in a statistical
model (logistic model described in
appendix 1) to predict adoption of the
dairy technology – this model
ʻcomparesʼ significant attributes of
farmers who have adopted and those
who have not adopted. Traditional
technology adoption models use only
survey data, for both household
characteristics and location variables
which are estimated using proxies for
district and farmer estimates for
distance.
What characteristics do
technology-adopting farmers
have in common?
•Length of growing period
•Access to markets
•Farming systems
•Off-farm income sources
•Climatic conditions
•
82.30% Matched Predictions
STEP 3: Models using
only GIS variables
(household and other
characteristics held
constant at their means)
are used to map
probabilities of adoption
spread over the relevant
areas.  The predictions are
found to be just as good as
predictions based on
survey variables only
Figure 1: Napier grass adoption targeting using observations approach 
(Adapted from Staal and Thornton, 2004)
The survey and GIS variables used in this guide are contained in Table 1
Criteria-based targeting
Unlike observation-based targeting, which relies on survey data (observations), this approach is based on expert opinion. 
The expert suggests parameters likely to be associated with uptake of the intervention, such as specific climate, market 
access and other conditions.
The area where each criterion exists is mapped and, by overlaying the individual layers, the area where all criteria are 
satisfied is identified: this is the area where (in the opinion of the experts) it is most likely that the intervention will be 
adopted. This area of confluence is refereed to as the ‘recommendation domain’ for adoption of the particular technology. 
This method can be used when detailed household survey data are not available but is entirely dependent on the quality 
of the expert opinion.
It is instructive to note that in targeting interventions, social and economic criteria are often much more critical to success 
of the intervention than natural and technical requirements; as a result some of the technologies targeted in this guide have 
taken these into consideration. Table 2 provides a list of the criteria used in developing maps in this guide.
3
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Roads layer: e.g. areas with
smaller distances on all weather
roads to urban are as
Population density layer: e.g.
areas with greater than 50 0
people per square kilometre
Rainfall layer: e.g. areas with
greater than 3,000 mm rainfall per
year
Elevation: e.g. areas between 25 0
and 750 meters above sea level
Cattle density layer: e.g. areas with
top 50 % of grade cattle density
Recommendation domain
combining all layers. This
composite layer shows where
expert criteria intersect.
Figure 2: How criteria layers are superimposed to create a targeting map 
(Adapted from Staal and Thornton 2004)
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) layers
GIS combine layers of information about a place to give a better understanding of that place. The information could be 
about market access, demographics, agro-climatic, cattle densities, amongst others. Conceptually, superimposing one 
layer on another combines the information of the two layers, thus providing multiple information sets, for example, about 
access to market and demographic characteristics.
 
GIS analysis is rapidly becoming an important tool in assessing potential for technology use. There is no doubt that spatial 
factors represented as GIS layers can show key influences to adoption of dairy interventions. For example, rainfall has been 
found to be closely related to adoption of certain interventions, such as planted fodder and even keeping dairy cattle. In 
this targeting guide, GIS derived data was used either separately (in criteria-based targeting) or in combination with survey 
derived data (in observation-based targeting) to predict where the probability of adoption is highest. As observed by Staal 
et al., (2002), only the variables for which GIS layers are available can be used to make useful spatial predictions. Survey 
variables such as age of household head, experience or years of education, while important in determining adoption of 
technologies, do not lend easily to mapping.
Below we present some of the GIS layers used in the guide and briefly explain how they were generated and how we expect 
them to influence adoption of the different dairy interventions.
4
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Below we present some of the GIS layers used in the guide and briefly explain how they were generated and how we expect 
them to influence adoption of the different dairy interventions.
• Human population density is computed as the number of persons per square kilometre. It is derived from the 1999     
   census data of the Kenya Central Bureau of Statistics. The data resolution is at sub-locational level. 
• Areas of high human population density correspond to centres of high milk consumption where producers are likely    
  to be able to sell their milk production locally. Also, population pressure is seen as a key driving factor for uptake of      
  productivity enhancing interventions as high demand motivates farmers to increase their productivity.
Figure 4: Human population density layer 
• Calculated as the ratio of precipitation over potential evapo-transpiration (PPE). 
• For the Kenyan Highlands, the higher the PPE, the higher the potential for keeping dairy cattle. This is because
   higher PPE provides good conditions for growing forage, a key input in dairy production. 
• High PPE is also mostly associated with high altitude and thus temperate climatic conditions suitable for rearing dairy cattle.
Figure 3: Agro-climatic potential layer.
5
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
• Based on the Kenya highlands road network reflecting the road infrastructure in 2000.
• Nairobi, with approximately 2.14 million persons according to the 1999 census, is the largest metropolis in Kenya and   
  constitutes the largest market for surplus milk produced in rural areas. Proximity to Nairobi is an indicator of good       
  market access and also access to administrative and technical services based in the city.
• This layer was created using the Department of Livestock Development’s district annual reports for 1995.
   Divisional level data was used.
• The map clearly shows current areas of high dairy cattle concentration.
Figure 5: Total distance (km) to Nairobi layer
Figure 6: Cattle density layer
6
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Table 1: List of variables used in observation based targeting
Table 2: Criteria used to map recommendation domains for interventions
Variables
Data
Source
Rationale of use
Sex of the household (hh) head
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
GIS
GIS
GIS
GIS
GIS
GIS
Years of farming experience for the hh head
Age of the household (hh) head
Years of formal education for hh head
Landholding of hh in acres
Annual precipitation/potential evapo-
transpiration (PPE)
Total road distance (km) from hh to Nairobi
Distance from homestead to a medium size
urban centre on tarmac road
Tarmac road distance to nearest urban centre
All-weather earth road distance to urban centre
Dry-weather only road distance to nearest
urban centre
Percentage of hhs in the sub-location with
stated access to formal milk outlets
Distance of the hh from the nearest qualiﬁed
veterinary service provider
Mean human population density, 5 km radius
Percentage of hhs in the sub-location with
stated access to extension services
Male headed households are likely to have better access to information and services
Longer farming experience predisposes farmer to better farming techniques 
through ‘learning by doing’
Age comes with experience and better management skills
More formal education is likely to increase farmer capacity for management and for 
utilizing information
Larger landholding implies more land available for cattle keeping but may reduce 
the need for concentrate feeding
Availability of extension services implies support for the dairy enterprise in general
Local availability of formal milk outlets implies reliable milk market, providing 
incentive to invest in dairy enterprise
Greater distance to a vet implies decreased access to livestock services.
High population density is expected to correspond with high demand for milk and 
thus favourable local market; however it may imply pressure on land holdings
Higher PPE corresponds to more favourable agro-climatic conditions for dairy 
production
Greater distance to Nairobi implies reduced access to milk markets and livestock 
services, lower milk prices and higher input prices   
Greater distance to an urban centre implies reduced market access.
Greater distance along main roads to urban centres is expected to reduce prices in 
milk markets, and raise prices and reduce availability of inputs and services
Greater distance along secondary roads  reduces milk prices while raising prices and 
reducing availability of inputs and services 
Greater distance along seasonal roads will reduce access to input and output 
markets, and increase seasonal risks
GIS criteria layers
Basis for layer
Roads layer
Travel time layer
Rainfall grid
Population density layer
Improved cattle density layer
Household poverty layer 
Milk surplus (or deﬁcit) layer
Market access layer
Tis layer  allows speciﬁcation of criteria based on distance over given road types (all weather, 
tarmac, etc) to the speciﬁc urban centres, towns etc  
Tis layer allows experts to give limits on how long a farmer can travel to a market or nearby 
town using a speciﬁed means of transport for a technology to be considered viable.
Te rainfall grid allows expert selection of areas on the basis of total annual rainfall or precipi-
tation / evapo-transpiration (PPE) .
Allows identiﬁcation of areas with certain speciﬁc population densities (people per square 
kilometer).
Usually expressed as percentage of total cattle population, this layer provides experts with 
option to select areas with relatively greater or lesser improved cattle densities.
While other layers (such as roads) can be used as proxies for market access, this layer is a 
simple average of total distance values weighted by population.
Tis layer provides percentages of households within given income brackets, such as the 
poverty line ( US$1 a day).
Surplus is excess of milk production over consumption in an area. Deﬁcit is shortfall of milk 
production below consumption in an area.
7
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Section 2
Dairy Interventions
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Improved dairy cattle
Market-oriented dairy farming using exotic cattle started in Kenya almost a century ago when European settlers introduced 
dairy cattle breeds from their native countries.  Crossbred cattle dairy production by Africans began in 1954 when a 
colonial policy paper, the Swynnerton Plan, allowed them for the first time to engage in commercial agriculture. Today 
it is estimated that Kenya has up to 6.7 million dairy cattle (SDP, 2005) and about 1.8 million households who rely on 
dairying. Significantly, thousands of jobs are created within the dairy milk marketing chains; these employment effects of 
dairying are discussed on page 32 .  
Factors used to predict probability of adoption of improved dairy cattle, derived from statistical analysis of survey 
and other spatial data, were:
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
• Total distance to Nairobi: closeness to Nairobi associated with adoption.
• Nearness to roads: closeness to roads associated with adoption.
• Education level of head of household: more years of education associated with adoption.
• Years of farming experience of head of household: more years of farming experience associated with adoption.
8
Why improved dairy cattle?
• Improved dairy cattle produce on average 6-times as much milk per year as zebu cattle: 1,500 kg of milk per
   lactation  compared to zebu which produce an average of 250 kg. 
•  Other productivity indicators, such as age at first calving and growth rate, are also superior compared to local zebu cattle. 
•  Improved cattle are more efficient in converting feed to milk. 
•  Improved dairy animals are also larger and therefore fetch higher prices when sold for meat.
•  Improved dairy cattle are suited to intensive production systems where land is limited; they provide better
    returns to investments in the intensive production systems.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 7: Predicted probability of adoption of dairy cattle
Interpretation and discussion of the map
This map shows the predicted probabilities of adoption of improved dairy animals. It combines the spatial mapping of the 
factors predisposing adoption of improved dairy cattle: favourable climates, good market access, and experience/ exposure 
of the dairy farmer, to predict probability of adoption.
The different colours represent differences in predicted probabilities of adoption of the innovation: the darker the shading 
the higher the likelihood of adoption. 
Low probability (lighter colours) implies a lower chance of adoption of improved dairy cattle because of unfavourable 
climate and/or socio-economic factors.
From the map, Kiambu is seen to show between 75% and 100% probability of adoption owing to the convergence of all 
major predisposing factors. In contrast, places such as Mbeere show less than 25% likelihood of adoption because they are 
further away from large, formal markets and have lower rainfalls.
9
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Zero-grazing
In the Kenyan Highlands, two distinct feeding systems for dairy cattle can be distinguished: zero-grazing, also known as 
stall feeding, and open grazing. In some textbooks they are called intensive and extensive feeding systems, respectively. In 
between the zero-grazing and open grazing feeding systems, lies semi zero-grazing or semi-intensive feeding system which 
combines stall feeding and open grazing
In zero-grazing, cattle are confined in stalls and all their feed requirements are brought to them. In open grazing, cattle 
are kept on pasture where they obtain the largest proportion of their feed, often with some additional supplementation 
during milking. The choice of the feeding system is normally motivated by a desire to optimize the limiting resource. In 
areas of high population density, land tends to be the limiting factor whereas in open grazing labour is the limiting factor. 
Expenditure on purchased feeds and concentrates are higher in zero-grazing system than in open grazing.  
Why zero-grazing system?
•   Allows for optimal utilization of land in situations where land is a limiting factor. For example, in areas of
    high population density where farm size tends to be small.
•  Intensive systems give higher output and productivity per cow or unit area of land.
•   Zero-grazing reduces the number of pests (especially ticks and intestinal worms) since the animals do not
    graze on infested pastures. 
•   It reduces risk of damage to crops caused by straying cattle. 
Factors used to predict probability of adoption of zero-grazing, derived from statistical analysis of survey and other 
spatial data were:
• Farm size: smaller farm size associated with adoption.
• Human population density: higher population densities associated with adoption.
• Total distance to Nairobi: closeness to Nairobi associated with adoption.
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
10
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 8: Predicted probability of adoption of zero-grazing
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The darker the shading, the higher the probability of adoption of zero-grazing. Adoption of zero-grazing is largely driven by 
the density of human population suggesting that adoption of zero-grazing technology is a reaction to growing population 
pressure: variables such as population density, farm size and proximity to Nairobi all show significant correlation with 
adoption of zero-grazing.
Favourable climates, evidenced by higher precipitation, lead to higher adoption of zero-grazing but other agricultural 
enterprises compete for land in such high potential areas, pushing dairying towards greater intensification.
Highly populated areas in central Kenya, such as around Nairobi and parts of the Rift Valley, show the highest likelihoods 
of adoption of zero-grazing.
 
11
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Concentrate feeding
Concentrates are energy, protein; fat or mineral supplements fed to dairy cattle and are used to supplement fibrous forages 
and fodder that constitute the basal diet. Many concentrates are by-products from cereal production but they also include 
by-products from other crops, such as oilseeds, as well as feeds derived from animal sources, such as meat and bone meal. 
Effective supplementary feeding of concentrates is critical to the success of all dairy farms. 
The main factors influencing the response, in terms of increased milk production, to concentrate feeding are genetic 
potential for milk production, stage of lactation,  feeding level in relation to milk production, heat stress,  pasture 
availability and nutrient content,  substitution rate of the concentrate for pasture,  quality of concentrates. However, 
to justify using concentrates, the cost must at least be matched by increased milk production. The optimum amount of 
dietary energy and protein to maximise profits is therefore determined by the interaction of cow and feed factors, as well 
as feed costs and milk prices. 
Overall in Kenya, less than 20% of the farmers use concentrates (Staal et al., 2001) and even this figure has been declining 
due to rising costs relative to prices paid out for milk. However, close to major towns the use of concentrates increases to as 
high as 70%, for instance in Kiambu district, (Staal et al. 1998) and reduces to less than 10% of the households in districts 
farther away from urban centres. Many farmers use small amounts of concentrates to relax the cows when milking and not 
really for increased milk production; we however do not consider this to be true adoption of concentrate feeding.
Adoption of concentrates is also affected by the quality of the concentrates available. The perception that manufactured 
animal feeds may be of questionable quality has been a recurring policy issue in Kenya (Muriuki et al., 2003)
12
Why concentrate feeding?
• To achieving high milk production
• Higher stocking rates are possible, increasing the income per hectare.
• The growth of heifers and cows that have not reached mature size is promoted. This increases their appetite
   and milk production in current and future lactations.
• Cows fed supplements maintain better body condition score when pasture availability is low. This increases         
  their ability to reach their milk yield potential and helps reduce the time of their first oestrus after calving.
• Allows flexibility to increase milk production when milk prices are high.
• Appropriate supplementation can increase milk protein content when the energy intake from pasture is low.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Factors used to predict the probability of adoption of concentrate feeding, derived from statistical analysis of survey and 
other spatial data were:
• Increasing market access, as indicated by distances to urban centres: shorter distance associated with adoption.
• Total distance to Nairobi: closeness to Nairobi associated with adoption.
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
• Years of formal education and years of farming experience are some of the human capital (survey derived) variables          
   influencing adoption trends; while acreage kept under maize was also an important factor in influencing the use of     
   concentrates. See also Staal et al 2002.
Figure 9:  Predicted probability of adoption of concentrate feeding
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The darker shading corresponds to areas where probability of adoption of concentrate feeding is highest. From the map 
we can see that the use of concentrates is usually but not necessarily practiced in areas around towns. Market access 
is important: the shorter road distance to urban centres - proxy for good market access - are associated with use of 
concentrates.
Farmers who live in areas with high rainfall use more concentrates. This may be related to the presence of improved cattle 
in these areas: concentrates are normally fed only to improved cattle.
13
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Napier grass
Napier grass (Pennisetum purpureum) is an improved fodder crop, especially important in cut-and-carry systems (zero-
grazing), and can produce large quantities of forage. Napier grass is a fast growing, deeply rooted, perennial grass growing 
up to 4 metres tall that can spread by underground stems to form thick ground cover. Napier grass is best suited to high 
rainfall areas but it is relatively drought-tolerant and can also grow well in drier areas. It does not, however, grow well in 
waterlogged areas. It can be grown along with forage legumes, around field boundaries and along contour lines or terraces 
to help control erosion. Napier grass is best suited to low to medium altitudes, but can grow in a wide range of well 
drained soils. It is ready for harvest three to four months after planting and harvesting can be repeated every six to eight 
weeks for up to five years.
Yields depend on agro-ecological zone and management but on average Napier gives 12 to 25 tonnes per hectare of dry 
matter per year. Much higher yields are possible with application of fertiliser and better management, creating a possibility 
for surplus production which can be conserved for feeding in the dry season.
Factors used to predict probability of adoption of Napier grass, derived from statistical analysis of survey and other 
spatial data, were:
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
• Human population density: higher population densities associated with adoption.
• Greater market access represented by shorter distances to urban centres: farmers who are able to sell more milk are
   more likely to use Napier.   
• Total distance to Nairobi: closeness to Nairobi associated with adoption.
• Educational level of head of household: more years of education associated with adoption.
14
Why Napier grass? 
• It is an improved high-yielding fodder crop.
• Produces large biomass per hectare compared to other forage crops.
• Adapted to different climatic conditions, from moderate to very high rainfall areas. However, not suited to
  very  high altitudes because it is susceptible to frost.
• Can help controls maize stalk borer by trapping the ovipositing moths if planted around maize (the ‘pull’  
         
   component of the push-  pull approach; Desmodium constitutes the ‘push’). 
• Can prevent soil erosion and excessive run-off.
• It has deep roots, so it is fairly drought resistant.
• The tender, young leaves and stems are very palatable to livestock.
• Napier grass grows fast.
• Can remain productive for up to 5 years (it is a perennial crop) removing the need for annual replanting.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 10: Predicted probability of adoption of Napier grass
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The darker the shading, the higher the probability of adoption of Napier grass. The darker areas receive high rainfall 
and have high human population density. Access to milk market, as indicated by presence of milk collection centres and 
proximity to Nairobi are also associated with adoption. In summary, adoption of Napier grass is more likely in intensive 
or intensifying market-oriented production systems.
15
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Utilisation of crop residues
Crop residues are the portions of the harvested crop that remains after the grain or other primary product is removed.
The most common crop residues used by the small-scale farmers in Kenya are:
• maize stovers 
• green maize stalks
• sweet potato vines
• banana pseudo-stems and leaves
• vegetable waste
• sugar cane tops
• bean and soybean hulls
• crushed maize grain (rejects)
• sunflower heads
• wheat, barley or oat straw
These crop residues often make up a sizeable contribution to the total available feed supply, especially in the smallholder 
dairy production systems where land holdings are too small for fodder production. On Kenyan smallholdings, an estimated 
40% of annual forage energy is derived from crop residues (Stotz, 1983). The quality of various crop residues is determined 
by the protein and energy or digestible dry matter (DDM) content of the particular residue. All crop residues possess their 
highest quality at the time of grain harvest and decline in quality the longer they remain in the field.
Two methods that can enhance the quality of residues are: 
• harvest early to capture maximum residue quality.
• use of chemical treatments, primarily anhydrous ammonia, although the latter is rarely economically viable.   
Why feed crop residues?
• Dry crop residues from cereals, such as maize or sorghum stover, are relatively easy to store for use in times of  
   feed scarcity and often available in relatively large quantities. Although generally they have a low nutritive
   value  they can support reasonable milk yields if fed with a supplement of high nutritive value, such as
   concentrates, legume fodder, etc.
• Some residues, such as sweet-potato vines or vegetable waste, although generally only available in small
  quantities can be of high nutritive value and can be used as supplements. 
• Use of crop residues helps to create important synergies in crop-livestock farming systems;  crop residues are fed to  
   cattle, reducing the need for planted or purchased fodder, while manure from the cattle is used in the
   field to grow crops thus recycling nutrient and helping to maintain soil fertility. This ensures that there
   are multiple benefits and cost savings from each enterprise.  
Factors that increased the likelihood of adoption of crop residues derived from statistical analysis of survey and other 
spatial data, were:
• Total distance to Nairobi: closeness to Nairobi associated with adoption.
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
• Human population density: higher population densities associated with adoption.
16
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 11: Predicted probability of adoption of feeding crop residues
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The darker the shading, the higher the probability that feeding of crop residues will be adopted. Factors associated with 
feeding crop residues include high rainfall and factors associated with market access. High rainfall areas are normally 
heavily populated: land holdings in such areas tend to be small, increasing the need to utilise all available feed resources, 
including crop residues.
17
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Forage legumes
Forage legumes are important in the smallholder farming systems in Kenya because they are high in protein and, due to 
their ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen, can also improve soil fertility.
Research estimates (Staal et al., 2001) show that average milk yields per cow are below the genetic potential (approximately 
1500 kg per lactation for improved cattle). This can be attributed in part to lack of adequate quality feed. Napier grass 
and cereal by-products, which commonly form the bulk of roughage for dairy cows, are generally low in crude protein, 
especially so during the dry season. Commercial protein sources that could supplement these roughages are too expensive 
for many smallholder dairy farmers to afford on a regular basis and in adequate amounts (FAO, 1985; Valk, 1990). 
Production and utilisation of forage legumes is one of the low-cost methods for improving both the quantity and quality 
of livestock feeds on smallholder farms. The legumes can also concurrently enhance soil fertility for companion fodder 
grasses and subsequent cereal crops (Tothill, 1986, Mwangi et al., 1998) thereby reducing the cost of livestock feed and 
crop production for the resource poor farmer.
Criteria for predicting likelihood of adoption of Desmodium and Calliandra, derived from expert opinion and 
spatial data:
• Rainfall greater than 900mm per year
• Elevation between 250 and 750 meters above sea-level
• Human population density greater than 250 persons per km2
• Improved cattle density greater than 50 cattle per km2
18
Why forage legumes?
• Forage legume crops are high in protein and can be used to supplement diets based on low-protein basal forages
• Forage legumes can fix atmospheric nitrogen; this leads to improved soil fertility, enhanced forage and mulching    
   quality.
• Legumes can reduce the rate of decline of soil fertility, or even enhance crop yields, and can also reduce the length  
  of the fallow period. 
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Interpretation and Discussion of the Map
The dark brown colour shows areas most suited to growing Desmodium and Calliandra. These are areas where the 
natural and socio-economic recommendation criteria combine to create optimal conditions for growing Desmodium or 
Calliandra. Dissemination should target these areas. The smaller map at the top-right corner shows the way the natural 
and socio-economic domains overlap and the areas where each of the domains is met -
In this map we show that for adoption of forage legumes, technical requirements may not be sufficient and socioeconomic 
criteria need to be considered as well. For example, a large part of Western Kenya meets all the natural criteria but not the 
socio-economic criteria, and uptake of these technologies in this region may therefore require greater effort.
Figure 12: Criteria for natural and socio-economic potential for Desmodium and Calliandra
19
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Silage making
Forages can be conserved by either ensiling or hay making. In this guide, the focus will be on silage making.
Silage is the material produced by controlled fermentation of chopped crop residues or forages with high moisture 
contents. The purpose is to preserve forages through natural fermentation by achieving anaerobic conditions. The ideal 
characteristics of material for silage preservation are: an adequate level of fermentable substrate (8-10% of DM) in the 
form of water soluble carbohydrate (WSC) and a dry matter (DM) content above 200g/kg. The moisture content should 
be 60-70 per cent and the pH below 4.2 (acid) for wet crops and below 4.8 for wilted silages (Lukuyu et al., 2006. In 
Kenya, Napier grass, sorghum, maize and sugarcane tops can all be made into silage.
In Kenya, the common procedures of ensiling include the use of trench silos and plastic silos. A trench silo is generally 
built underground, or semi-underground, with two solid walls. Advantages of the trench silo include ease of management 
and mechanization, e.g., where available a tractor  can be driven on top from one side to the other for compaction 
purposes. Compaction may also be achieved by applying other heavy loads or items. After compaction, it is covered with 
a plastic sheet pressed down with soil to maintain anaerobic conditions. In the plastic silo, plastic sheets or bags are used. 
These are filled with the ensiling materials and then compacted by trampling. The advantages of plastic silos are their low 
cost and the fact that they can be moved as needed.
Why silage making?
• Feed conservation, such as silage making, eases the serious feed shortages experienced in the dry season
• With adequate feed available year-round, animals remain in good condition 
• Advantage can be taken of the higher milk price in the dry season
Criteria-based targeting was used to predict where uptake of silage making is most likely to be successful. The criteria 
used include, high density of dairy cattle and appropriate agro-climatic conditions for producing feeds. However, because 
of the diversity of crops that could be ensiled, and therefore the wide range of climatic adaptability that they collectively 
allow, climate is not a major limitation. Areas with at least 900mm per annum of rainfall would be suitable for forage 
production. In addition, access to market is seen as a predisposing factor, with better access corresponding to higher chances 
that dissemination effort will succeed. Another factor that would affect adoption or non-adoption of feed conservation 
technology is the income level of the household. Adoption of this innovation entails outlay of cash (to buy polythene bags 
or dig the pit silo) and this would preclude poor households from adopting.  The criteria used are summarised overleaf.
  1Tractors are used on rental basis by significant number of “small” farmers especially in Rift Valley.
................................................................................................................................................
20
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 13: Combined domains for targeting feed conservation technology
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The dark brown colour represents areas best adapted for uptake of silage making – this is the areas where all four criteria 
converge. These include most areas in Central Province and other districts around Mount Kenya, such as Meru and Embu, 
as well as some districts in central and north Rift Valley, for example, Kericho, Molo, and areas adjoining Eldoret. 
Criteria for predicting likelihood of adoption of silage making, derived from expert opinion and spatial data:
• High density of improved dairy cattle: top 50% of dairy cattle density
• Medium human population density: between 25% and 75% of range
• Area close to a road: closest 50%
• Relatively less areas: top 50% richest locations among those living below the poverty line.
21
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Acaricide use
An acaricide is a chemical that kills ticks. The word is derived from Latin acarus, a mite and cide, kill. Acaricide are 
developed from different chemical classes. In the early 20th century arsenic, in the form of arsenic trioxide, was the only 
acaricide available. However, later organophosphorous compounds and carbonates were introduced and more recently 
amitraz and synthetic pyrethroids have become available. 
Use of acaricides has a number of inherent problems: development of resistance by ticks; environmental pollution; cost; 
and creation of enzootically unstable disease situations. However, in Kenya and other countries where tick and tick-borne 
diseases, such as ECF, cause economically significant losses, use of acaricide will continue well into the future. 
In the past, most acaricides have been used in plunge dips but other methods, especially hand spraying, are now popular 
with smallholders. 
Factors that increased the likelihood of adoption of acaricide use derived from statistical analysis of survey and other 
spatial data, were:
• Type of production system: more likely where open-grazing was practiced as opposed to zero-grazing. In fact, stall-fed   
   cattle are less susceptible to ticks borne diseases as they are confined.
• Total distance to Nairobi: adoption is associated with increased distance from Nairobi.
22
Why use acaricides?
• Tick infestation and tick borne diseases causes economically significant losses to livestock keepers.
• SDP surveys have shown (Staal et al., 2002) that of every 100 diseases reported by smallholder dairy farmers   
   in Kenya, on average 21 were ECF, a further 16 other tick-borne diseases (TBDs); in total 37% of reported    
   diseases were TBDs.
• Mortality rates from ECF infections are high.
• Treatment cost of ECF cases far outweighs cost of prevention with acaricide.
• When properly used, acaricide provide effective control of ticks, and thus the tick-borne diseases that they transmit.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 14: Predicted probability of acaricide adoption
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The areas on the map shaded darkest correspond to areas where probability of adoption of acaricide is highest. In these 
areas, challenge from ticks and tick-borne diseases is likely to be high. The dominant factor associated with a high 
probability of acaricide adoption is production system; predicted probability of adoption is high for all areas where dairy 
cattle are kept with the exception of areas like Kiambu district where the dairy system is predominantly zero-grazing. 
23
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Artificial Insemination 
To get a cow pregnant one can either use artificial insemination (AI) or natural service, that is using a bull. AI involves 
the use of semen that has been collected from selected bulls, tested for diseases and stored in individual doses at low 
temperature in liquid nitrogen. Mainly through the use of AI, Kenya has managed to upgrade and expand the national 
dairy herd population from about 300, 000 in the mid 1960s to around 6.7 million animals today. 
Prior to the privatization of AI service provision in the early 1990s, the government ran daily rounds of insemination in 
most rural areas. Inseminators passed through a fixed route each day to serve the animals brought by farmers to roadside 
cattle crushes. With the liberalization of AI provision in 1992, private practitioners who operate an ‘on call’ service 
emerged. Most farmers now have to contact the inseminator directly, by messenger or phone, and response is sometimes 
slow.  In addition, the cost has increased dramatically from KSh 1 per insemination at the height of subsidization in 1971 
to between KSh 580 and KSh 1000 for locally produced semen, and well over KSh 1,000 for imported semen.  
.
Factors that increased the likelihood of adoption of AI, derived from statistical analysis of survey and other spatial 
data, were:
• Increased market access: this is measured by total road distance (km) from homestead to the nearest urban centre.
   The shorter this distance greater the likelihood of adoption.
• Educational level of head of household: more years of education associated with adoption.
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
• Total distance to Nairobi: adoption is associated with decreased distance from  Nairobi.
24
Why AI?
• Leads to faster genetic improvement (or upgrading ) of the local herd. 
• Ensures widespread access to genetically superior sires.
• Even after death of sire, semen can still be used. 
• Rapid proof of quality of sires because with AI many offspring are produced in a short period. 
• The desired bull may be a great distance away; the semen can be quickly transported, saving time and money.
• Minimizes sexually transmitted diseases, e.g. brucellosis.
• Semen for AI is usually drawn from proven sires and thus superior phenotypic characteristics are transmitted to   
   the next generation. 
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 15: Predicted probability of adoption of AI
Interpretation and discussion of the map
Darker shading shows areas where there is a higher likelihood of farmers using AI technology, such as Kiambu and 
surrounding areas. From the map, it is evident that adoption of AI technology is most prevalent in the districts located 
in Central Kenya. Adoption is relatively lower in Western Province and most areas in North Rift despite indicators, like 
numbers of dairy cattle and agro-climatic potential, pointing to high potential for AI adoption.  Historical non use and 
cultural biases are some of the reasons that may be responsible for this discrepancy.   
25
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Dairy co-operatives
A cooperative is a legal entity owned by its members that usually serves to bring together and exploit the strengths of 
its individual members in the pursuit of an economic activity. Cooperatives are able to exploit economies of scale and 
enhance bargaining power when dealing with buyers and suppliers. The primary function of a dairy cooperative, at least in 
the Kenyan context, is to procure milk from farmers, bulk and standardize it and send it to the market. Some cooperatives 
have adopted vertical integration strategies and are also engaged in milk processing and distribution. Other peripheral but 
important activities of a cooperative include provision of extension services, such as breeding (artificial insemination) and 
animal health services, including vaccination and operation of mobile clinics. 
Dairy cooperatives should be located where dairy cattle and human population density is high. Dairy co-ops will have 
greatest impact in areas with surplus milk. They are, however, most needed when this surplus milk is in areas with poor 
market access. In areas where the milk surplus is in areas with good market access, dairy cooperatives can still perform well 
but there will be a greater choice of alternative marketing channels.   
Criteria for predicting likelihood of adoption of dairy cooperatives, derived from expert opinion and spatial data:
• Areas either far away, or very close to a major consumption centre; In areas far away from urban centres cooperatives  
  pool resources that overcome marketing constraints imposed by distance and poor infrastructure. On the other hand,  
  cooperatives nearer to large consumption centres make it easier for farmers to realise economies of scale and counter    
  competition from other players.
• Milk surplus is calculated as the excess of milk production over consumption in an area. Surplus milk creates the  
 
   necessity for marketing cooperatives.
26
Why dairy cooperatives?
• Effective and efficient way of marketing milk. The cooperative takes the responsibility for collecting and
   bulking the milk, transporting and selling it on behalf of the members. This function is very important because   
   marketing is a major problem in dairy development.
• Increases bargaining power when negotiating with suppliers and buyers. 
• Allows for pulling together of economic resources and thus creating synergies otherwise not available if each      
   member was to act on his/her own behalf.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 16: Combined recommendation domains for targeting of dairy co-operative development
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The dark brown areas represent regions where dairy cooperatives are most needed because they combine low market access 
with surplus milk production. Farmers in these areas are more likely to use collective marketing arrangements as they are 
unlikely to have access to alternative marketing arrangements.
The light brown areas combine high market access with high milk surplus. Farmers in these areas could still be in 
cooperatives but they also have other alternatives, such as private dairy companies and informal milk traders due to greater 
market access.
Dairy planners and development workers need to keep theses dynamics in mind when designing programs for dairy 
cooperative development.
27
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Milk preservation technology
Milk is nutritious for people but also a good medium of growth for various micro-organisms. The presence of undesirable 
bacteria in milk may cause deterioration of flavour or physical appearance and may cause disease in people. Souring of 
milk, discoloration, gassiness and many other defects are caused by the presence of different types of micro-organisms.  
Milk preservation is the process of preventing deterioration of milk quality by either maintaining low temperatures, as 
in milk coolers, or adding chemical preservatives. Lactoperoxidase (LPS) falls in the latter category and is a chemical that 
builds on the natural antibacterial effects in raw milk. 
In Kenya milk has traditionally been preserved in cold chains. This was especially true when the Kenya Cooperative 
Creameries (KCC) enjoyed a monopoly in milk marketing in Kenya and ran milk coolers in different parts of the country. 
Following the liberalization of the dairy sector and the entry of other players in the milk marketing, most of these 
coolers have become dilapidated through many years of disuse.  Although coolers can contribute significantly to reducing 
spoilage, they require high levels of technical expertise and investment to maintain, and often prove to be uneconomical, 
particularly where quantities of milk sold are small.  During the period that milk marketing has been liberalized, chemical 
preservatives have also been used extensively – albeit illegally - mostly by milk traders transporting small quantities of 
milk to the market. 
There is concern about misuse of chemicals such as hydrogen peroxide in milk preservation by some traders. Thus, there 
is a need for dissemination of ethically acceptable and technically appropriate milk preservation methods, such as LPS. 
Although use of LPS is not currently permitted in Kenya, its use has been approved by the FAO/WHO Joint Expert 
Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) and the Codex Alimentarius Commission. This process is natural and should not 
to be confused with the use of the banned and harmful chemical hydrogen peroxide. Economic viability and policy issues 
surrounding the use of LPS for milk preservation are discussed further in Section 3. 
Criteria expected to increase likelihood of adoption of milk preservation methods:
• Availability of a milk surplus: Where production exceeds demand, there will be a marketable surplus that needs to be 
moved elsewhere for sale. In these cases it is likely that the point of production is far from the point of sale and methods 
to extend shelf life are needed.  Milk surplus was estimated and divisions with the highest surpluses (50% of total) were 
considered most likely to use milk preservation.
• Areas far from the road:  Where producers are far from the road, it is likely that the milk travels further, and takes longer, 
to reach the point of collection and sale and, therefore, methods to extend shelf life are needed.  Using the road network, 
distances from the road was calculated.  25% of the area, representing sites furthest from roads, was considered most likely 
to benefit from milk preservation.
28
Why preserve milk ?
• Milk is a good medium of growth for various microbes, some of which are pathogenic.
• To prevent deterioration of quality and increase the shelf life.
• To maintain quality of milk along the value chain, particularly where the point of production is far from the   
   point of sale.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 17: Combined recommendation domains for targeting milk preservation interventions 
The dark areas are where all factors expected to increase probability converge and therefore, likelihood of adoption is 
expected to be highest. From the map above, adoption of milk preservation technologies would be highest in Nyandarua 
and Nakuru districts within the central highlands, Kericho and Bomet in central Rift and Eldoret and Nandi in north 
Rift Valley. 
29
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Training and certification of milk traders
Itinerant milk traders are a common feature of milk marketing in Kenya. They provide an important distributional 
network, linking producers and consumers. About 86% of Kenya’s milk is sold to consumers unprocessed. Of this about 
half (44%) is marketed through informal mobile traders (23%), milk bars shops and kiosks (15%) and cooperatives (6%) 
while the other half (42%) is sold directly from farms to consumer (SDP 2004a)  
The informal traders, therefore, constitute an important component of the informal milk sector in Kenya and play an 
important role in availing milk to low income consumers. Training and certification of informal milk traders can lead to 
substantial and clear improvements in milk quality. But where will the impact of training and certification of informal 
milk traders be likely to have the greatest impact? 
To answer this question, we need to identify areas where large numbers of itinerant milk traders will be present. Milk 
traders will always be present where milk is produced for the market (as opposed to for subsistence). There are two clear 
patterns of development of informal milk trade: 
1. In areas near or around large urban centres that are densely populated with consumers who cannot afford prices
    offered by formal outlets. 
2. Informal milk trade is also active where milk surpluses are produced in remote areas where it is not economically
    viable for formal traders to source or sell milk. Some of these areas are only accessible to bicycles.
Criteria expected to increase likelihood of adoption of training and certification for milk traders:
• Milk surplus is calculated as the excess of milk production over consumption in an area. The extra milk that cannot
   be marketed through formal channels is disposed off through informal milk traders. 
• Low market access: Travel time to nearest tarmac road: by bicycle of 2 hours or more: This criterion, combined with      
   milk surplus, suggests infrastructural challenges that limit the access of milk producers in such areas by the
  formal market.
• Good market access: Travel time to nearest tarmac road: by bicycle of 30 minutes and less. This criterion, combined     
   with surplus milk, allows access to densely populated urban centres whose inhabitants cannot afford milk sold
   through formal channels.
30
Why train milk traders?
• To impart knowledge on skills, processes and procedures for safe milk handling. This is important because      
   there are public health concerns regarding milk marketed through informal channels. Training will improve          
   quality, increase shelf life, increase consumer confidence and therefore enhances profits for the informal  
    
   traders. (SDP, 2004 Training guide)
• Small scale itinerant traders are likely to be an important feature of milk trade in Kenya for a long time.  
    
  Training and certification is therefore important in making these traders responsible players in a sub-sector      
  where they are already playing a significant economic and social role.
• The informal milk sector needs to be supported and developed because it generates employment opportunities,  
   assists poor farmers in marketing their milk and avails milk to many consumers, especially the poor. .
• Traditionally, formal channels charge higher prices because of value addition and overheads associated with      
   formal marketing. Other secondary reasons for development of informal milk trade in these areas include     
   delayed payments to farmers, inappropriate milk collection or delivery procedures and unwillingness of the     
   formal sector to buy all available milk. 
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 18: Combined recommendation domains for targeting training of milk traders
Interpretation and discussion of the map
Both the light brown and dark brown areas on the map represent areas where informal milk traders are likely to exist and, 
therefore, are prime areas for targeting interventions in their training and certification. In the dark brown areas, informal 
marketing develops as a result of the presence of urban populations who are unable to afford milk at prices offered by the 
formal channels, i.e. pasteurised and packaged milk. In the light brown areas, poor infrastructure, especially lack of roads, 
prevents the formal market from operating. 
31
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Section 3
Policy implications for
smallholder dairy development
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Introduction
The previous section dealt with identifying areas within Kenya where selected dairy interventions were most likely to be 
adopted so that promotion and dissemination efforts can be targeted appropriately. Technology is an important driver 
of dairy development in Kenya because increasing pressure on available land dictates that growth will come more from 
increased productivity than expansion in the scale of the dairy enterprise, such as through more land under cultivation 
or increasing size of herds of low productivity animals. But technology alone is not sufficient to sustain development in 
dairy and it has to be underpinned by appropriate and supportive policies. Indeed, the enacting and implementation of 
appropriate dairy policies would themselves be important drivers of the technology adoption process. This section looks 
at three key aspects of dairy production, presenting some results from studies conducted by the SDP and considers their 
policy implications. The aspects examined are:
• Cost of milk production
• Milk preservation along the production to marketing channel 
• Employment generation in dairy activities
Cost of milk production
Reliable estimates of the cost of milk production are important to dairy industry stakeholders including farmers, processors, 
policy makers and private dairy development agencies. This information is important for decision-making related to 
investment in dairy development relative to other enterprises, and for the design of policies to support smallholder dairy 
development. Moreover, persistent complaints by farmers that producer prices do not cover cost of milk production 
are a further justification to identify reliable estimates of the cost of milk production. Farmers and policy makers need 
a dependable benchmark upon which to base their milk supply decisions; while in a market where prices have been 
decontrolled, quantities supplied will be based on market prices, production decisions are influenced in the long term by 
costs of production relative to market prices. Policy makers can use this information to determine what tariffs to levy on 
imported dairy products to bring parity between domestic prices and prevailing world prices.
The data
Data for the cost estimates were obtained during in-depth studies of selected representative dairy farms in Kiambu, 
Nakuru and Nyandarua districts between October 1997 and March 2000. A total of 21 farm households were surveyed 
in Kiambu and 11 each for Nakuru and Nyandarua. A longitudinal survey was done during which each farm was visited 
twice weekly over some 14 months to obtain daily records of milk production and sales figures, quantities and prices of 
inputs used in the dairy enterprise, and other relevant data (SDP 2004b; Staal et al., 2003). 
No two farms are exactly the same in terms of farmer characteristics, managerial skills, technology practices and access to 
resources and the cost of milk production will vary according to these differences. To estimate cost of milk production, we 
envisaged three farm models for dairy enterprises that were deemed to be broadly representative of dairy farms in Kenya. 
These categories are described below:
i. Intensive production system: In this production system land holdings are smallest, stall-feeding is the main feeding 
practice and supplementation with purchased inputs is highest. Land is the main constraint. Kiambu district indicate 
division is representative of an area where the intensive dairy production system is practised in Kenya, i.e. high potential 
agricultural areas, with high human population density and good access to markets. 
32
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
ii. Semi-intensive production system: Land is not as serious a constraint as in the intensive production system. Open grazing 
is common and some supplementation with purchased inputs is also done. Nakuru district is representative of areas where 
the semi-intensive production system is practised in Kenya.
iii. Extensive production system: In this system, which is also called pasture production system, land is not a constraint 
and cattle are open-grazed. Land holdings are large and there is little or no supplemental feeding with purchased inputs. 
Nyandarua district is representative of areas where the extensive production system is practiced in Kenya.
The results
The estimated costs of milk production from the longitudinal surveys conducted between October 1997 and December 1998 
for Kiambu District and between November 1998 and March 2000 for Nakuru and Nyandarua Districts are presented in 
Table 3. 
Cost of production was highest in the most intensive system (Kiambu) and lowest in the most extensive system (Nyandarua), 
reflecting the costs of the high-concentrate rations used in the more intensive systems. Profits were marginally highest in 
Nyandarua at KSh 4.8 per litre, followed by Kiambu with KSh 4.1 and Nakuru with KSh 3.6 per litre while  sale price of 
milk,  was highest in Kiambu and lowest in Nyandarua.
Table 3: Cost of milk production, prices, revenues and profits
It should be noted that the ‘profits’ described here are in fact ‘above-normal profits’. This is simply because the costs of family 
labour have already been deducted from these returns. The results underline the important role of smallholder dairy production 
in sustaining rural livelihoods, smallholder dairying usually pays wages higher than those otherwise locally available. Added 
to this is the employment created through casual and long-term hired labour on even the smallest dairy farms, contributing 
to livelihoods of others within the rural community including the most resource-poor (see last section in this chapter).  
Figure 19 compares individual cost components in milk production, with revenue overlaid to allow comparison between 
total revenue and total cost from the three types of dairy enterprise. In all the three farm models, revenue exceeded cost, 
showing positive returns to dairy enterprise. 
Ksh
Kiambu
(1998)
Cost of production per litre
17.2
17.6
21.3
4.1
83
17
Nakuru
(2000)
13.3
15.2
16.9
3.6
90
10
Nyandarua
(2000)
11.9
14.3
16.7
4.8
86
14
Sale price per litre
Revenue per litre*
Proﬁt (KSh per litre)
Revenues from milk (%)
Revenues from animal sales (%)
*Revenue in a dairy enterprise accrues from sales of milk and animals, and milk consumed.
33
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Kiambu
Nakuru
Nyandarua
Family labour
Hired labour
Milk to calves & labourers
Mortalities
Veterinary cost
Concentrates
Cost of own produced
forage
Purchased fodder
Fixed cost
Revenue
Figure 19: Comparison of cost and revenue components in three dairy production systems
However, the results presented above are for a ‘normal’ year, in which there is neither a drought nor more rain than average, 
resulting in either reduced or increased milk production. Such supply shifts can cause prices to fall or rise considerably, and 
thus alter a dairy farmer’s financial results. In early 2002, not only did the price fall, but milk processors placed a quota on 
amounts delivered to their collection centres and even imposed weekly “milk holidays” when no deliveries were accepted. 
Simulated estimates of dairy returns for this period gave the following results of profit per litre: KSh -1.2, -1.0 and -0.8 for 
Kiambu, Nakuru and Nyandarua, respectively, i.e. in all three systems during this period the dairy enterprises operated at 
a loss. These results clearly demonstrate the vulnerability of smallholder dairy farmers in Kenya to supply shifts (see SDP 
2004b).
Conclusions and policy implications
The results from the longitudinal study show clearly that in normal years, smallholder dairy producers in Kenya are able to 
capture useful profits. Based on the detailed daily household data, the dairy enterprise is demonstrated to provide above-
normal profits, meaning that returns are higher than those available through alternative rural wage labour. This is true for 
a range of dairy production practices from intensive stall-feeding systems to extensive grazing systems. The understanding 
that farmers also capture additional but unmeasured benefits, such as from the use of manure and from the insurance and 
financial values of livestock assets, further strengthens their returns and competitiveness. The resilience of smallholder dairy 
farming as a primary provider of livelihoods in many rural areas of Kenya cannot be reasonably questioned.
Results from other studies (see Staal et al, 2000) underline the important role that road infrastructure plays, particularly in 
the informal market that dominates the dairy sub-sector. These have shown that farmers who are 75 kilometres or more from 
Nairobi can receive 22% less for their milk compared to farmers closer to the urban areas. Moreover, for each additional 
kilometre of poor feeder road that separates a farm from the main road, milk price is reduced by almost KSh0.50 per litre, 
or about 3% per kilometre. The analysis also showed that simply upgrading the poor feeder roads to good murram roads 
could reduce transport costs on those roads by 30%, and raise prices paid to farmers accordingly. Poor roads also significantly 
reduce farmer access to important support services, such as animal health and artificial insemination, which have further 
suffered from reduced public support since the early 1990s. Therefore, policies that target improvement of feeder roads and 
road infrastructure are likely to have a significant positive impact on the livelihoods of dairy farmers, particularly those in 
rural areas distant from major urban centres. 
34
Ksh/L
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Poor roads also significantly reduce farmer access to important support services, such as animal health and artificial 
insemination, which have further suffered from reduced public support since the early 1990s. Therefore, policies that target 
improvement of feeder roads and road infrastructure are likely to have a significant positive impact on the livelihoods of dairy 
farmers, particularly those in rural areas distant from major urban centres.
The simulation analysis of the seasonal price changes seen in early 2002 demonstrated that under some supply conditions, 
farmers in the main milk surplus areas can be adversely affected and temporarily dairy farming can become unprofitable. 
Farmers using intensive production practices may be most vulnerable to these conditions. This may hint at greater long-term 
competitiveness of the extensive production systems if increased supply and stagnating demand lead to overall lower real 
farm-gate milk prices.
Reduction in demand is often due to economic decline, which contributes to lower disposable incomes and reduced purchase 
of milk by some Kenyan households. Efforts to raise demand through, for example, donor-funded promotional campaigns 
about the benefits of drinking milk, are likely to have limited success unless general economic conditions improve. Given the 
relatively high retail price of pasteurised milk (generally more than double the farm-gate price), efforts to reduce retail prices 
through more efficient processing and low-cost packing could be expected to have a greater effect in raising consumption.
Available evidence suggests that, for the foreseeable future, smallholder Kenya dairy farmers will continue to do well under 
a variety of production systems even though seasonal fluctuations may have temporary adverse effects on some groups. 
Significant farm-level profits, combined with continued milk deficits and high prices in some areas, particularly the western 
part of the country, suggest that public-policy support for smallholder dairy development will continue to be an effective 
means of improving farmers’ welfare and livelihoods and stimulating rural development.
35
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
An assessment of the cost and feasibility of alternative milk 
preservation systems in Kenya
Many farmers in Kenya live in areas with poor roads, where electricity is lacking or cooling is uneconomical, which leads to 
losses of milk through waste and spoilage. Some milk market agents in such remote areas use harmful and illegal chemical 
agents to preserve milk. While cooling is still the preferred method of bulk raw milk preservation, an alternative method of 
preservation using the lactoperoxidase system (LPS)  has been developed for use by small-scale farmer groups in poor milk 
market access regions. 
Although use of LPS is not currently allowed in Kenya it is an important policy option that merits discussion and consideration. 
Use of LPS has been approved by both the FAO/WHO Joint Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) and the 
Codex Alimentarius Commission which evaluates the safety of food additives and develop food standards and guidelines 
respectively. 
The results presented here touches on:
i. The financial feasibility of use of LPS compared to milk cooling and/or no preservation at all. 
ii. The potential for dairy farmers in the rural areas to increase their profitability by using LPS to preserve and sell their 
evening milk 
iii. The institutional feasibility for use of the LPS technology in milk marketing in Kenya. 
iv. The potential for LPS to replace potentially harmful chemicals used to preserve raw milk by some marketing agents. 
Approach
Cost-benefit analyses of milk preservation by cooling versus using LPS were conducted to assess their economic feasibility.
A case study of four milk coolers of varying sizes was conducted for information on the magnitude of costs involved. Data 
on costs of LPS was collected during trials with two milk collection groups in Bomet District and two private milk collection 
agents in Nyandarua District. Farmers in the two districts incur significant post-harvest losses in milk due to poor road 
infrastructure.  
Results
Milk cooling
It was found that the costs of cooling range from KSh1.10 to K.Sh1.30 per litre in large-scale chilling plants (with potential 
capacity ≥20,000 litres/ day) to about KSh1.80 in a small-scale plant (with potential capacity = 1200 litres/day). The cost 
of cooling was high when utilised capacity in the cooler was low. Electricity costs, which are among the highest in Africa, 
account for up to 30% of the cost of cooling.
Small-scale cooling was associated with a number of problems: 
i. No price premium was received for supply of chilled milk to the dairy processors even though chilling increased their       
   operational costs significantly. 
ii. The small-scale cooler was inadequately equipped (e.g. no standby generator or advanced milk quality control
    equipment) leading to frequent cases of milk spoilage. The spoilage of milk in the small-scale cooler accounted for 26%   
    of the total variable costs compared to none in any of the large scale coolers. 
2The lactoperoxidase system of milk preservation works by activating lactoperoxidase, an enzyme naturally present in milk which has a bacteriostatic effect.
It involves, first, addition and mixing of thiocyanate and, second, addition and mixing of percarbonate in good quality milk about 2 to 3 hours after milking.
.......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
36
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
LPS method of milk preservation
Use of LPS costs between KSh1.02 and KSh1.09 per litre, which suggests that it could be economically substituted for a 
small-scale underutilised cooler which costs about KSh1.8 per litre. However, a few obstacles could prevent the use of LPS to 
preserve evening milk. These include fear by women that they could lose control of especially evening milk to their husbands 
as a result of heightened marketing possibilities for all milk. Moreover, preference by some farmers to sell to informal milk 
market agents due to low prices and delayed payment by processors may also preclude the need for LPS. It was, however, 
found that strategic application of LPS on morning milk to prevent spoilage when collection or delivery to the processors 
is delayed enhanced profitability. The private milk collection agents who, prior to these trials, routinely added hydrogen 
peroxide to their milk to prevent spoilage felt that LPS was better because it retained milk’s natural taste and smell, and 
was not harmful. However, they were concerned that the cost of LPS could be higher relative to that of hydrogen peroxide. 
However, as has been shown, LPS cost compares favourably with chilling and could be even cheaper if procured in bulk from 
the international market.
Conclusions and recommendations
We conclude that cooling may not always be a solution to problems of milk spoilage and wastage due to lack of economies 
of scale or lack/interruption and cost of electricity. In addition, there are no premiums paid for chilled milk in the Kenyan 
market – thus removing a potential incentive for cooling. As a result, it could be more beneficial for some groups of farmers 
to use LPS. However, the prospects for use of LPS to aid dairy farmers realize higher profits through preservation and sale 
of especially evening milk is limited by low productivity of animals during the dry season, lack of milk market during the 
flush season and milk marketing problems in the formal dairy sector, such as delayed payment and low milk producer prices. 
Gender issues should be considered in promotion of the LPS technology since its adoption may lead to a shift in the control 
of benefits from milk sales from women to men – men traditionally control proceeds of formal marketing in agricultural 
households. Since LPS seems to be more preferable to other illegal chemicals, there is need to strive to review its legal status 
in Kenya. Legalization will lower its cost by making it broadly available. In addition the prohibition of LPS use in milk and 
milk products intended for international trade should be reviewed to foster its use and acceptability by stakeholders who 
participate in both local and international trade in milk and milk products.
37
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Income and employment generation in the dairy sector 
Employment and income effects at the farm-level
Poverty-reduction and employment generation are important goals in various development strategies and policies in Kenya, 
including the recent Economic Recovery Strategy for Wealth and Employment Creation (ERSWEC 2003) and the Strategy 
for Revitalization of Agriculture (SRA 2004). In these policy documents, it is recognised that dairy activities generate many 
employment opportunities in the course of milk production, processing and marketing. 
There are an estimated 1.8 million dairy farm households in Kenya (SDP 2005), which are heavily dependent on family 
labour. Dairy production is an important source of self-employment, especially for rural households. A significant proportion 
of dairy operators also hire long-term or casual labour, which creates employment among some of the poorest segments of 
society, including landless households. Because most dairy activities occur within mixed crop-livestock production systems, 
it is not easy to attribute full-time engagement of farm households to dairy activities alone. However, it is estimated that 
Source: SDP surveys, 1997-2000. 
These are based on detailed random structured surveys of over 3000 households in highland Kenya.
Dairy farming generates an average annual return to labour per enterprise of between KSh 38,000 (US$ 475) and 102,000 
(US$ 1,275) for small-to medium-scale farmers and KSh 482,000 (US$ 6,025) to large-scale farmers, with an average 
weighted annual return of KSh 114,000 (US$ 1,425) (Table 4). Compared to an average per capita GDP of approximately 
KSh 27,825 (US$ 347) for Kenya (World Bank, 2003), dairying provides consistently higher returns than those available 
through rural wage labour.
Dairying is estimated to engage more than one-third of dairy farmers on a full-time basis, which translates into some 600,000 
self-employed persons. Small- and medium-scale dairy enterprises account for most (87 %) of the employment that is 
attributed to dairying at the farm-level, largely because of their dominance in the dairy industry in the country.
Significantly, dairy farmers also engage full-time (permanent) hired labour for dairy production activities, and also occasionally 
hire casual labour. Hired farm labour for dairy is estimated to represent about 585,000 workers full-time country-wide or 
close to a quarter of the total agricultural labour force of some 2.5 million (Table 5). In total, some 841,000 people, 34% of 
the total agricultural labour force, are directly employed in dairy production at the farm level. 
Table 4: Employment and income generation through dairying at the farm level
  3Results in this section are updated from SDP 2004c
................................................................................
38
Self employment (Full time jobs/
1000L of milk produced daily)
Total direct farm employment
per 1000L milk production
Average returns to labour from
dairy production (KSh/farm/year)
Casual labour (Full time jobs/
1000L of milk produced daily)
Permanent hired labour (Full time jobs/
1000L of milk produced daily)
Small-scale
farms
≤2 cows
Medium-scale 
farms
3-6 cows
Large-scale
farms
>6cows
Average
39
60
6
105
38,000
17
44
2
63
102,000
5
43
1
49
482,000
23
50
3
76
114,000
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Self employment 
Total (numbers)
% of total
Casual labour
Long - term hired labour
Small &
medium scale
Large-scale
Total
Total employment in 
dairy as a % of the 
agric. labour force
245,000
454,000
35,900
735,000
87
10,960
93,000
2,300
106,000
13
255,960
547,000
38,200
841,000
100
10
22
2
34
Table 5: Direct full-time employment created through dairying at the farm level
Source: SDP dairy farm data, and JICA 2003 for total agricultural labour figures
Income and employment effects at milk market level
Approximately 6 million litres of milk are traded daily in Kenya through both formal and informal small-scale and large-scale 
processors and traders. Beyond the farm-level, processing and marketing of milk and other dairy products offer numerous 
other employment and income earning opportunities for the various participants in the milk supply chain. These include 
transporters, mobile milk traders, milk bars and shops/kiosks, small processors, service providers such as vehicle repairs, 
security firms and catering outlets. Mobile milk traders do not have fixed business premises. Milk collection from producers 
is mainly on foot, by bicycle or public transport.
Most small-scale traders handle some 50-120 litres of raw milk daily. Traders with milk bars have fixed premises and mainly 
sell both un-pasteurised and fermented liquid milk. Besides family labour, paid employees are actively involved in running 
the milk bars. 
Small processors in Kenya mostly process and sell pasteurised milk, either as wholesalers and/or retailers, with a small proportion 
of milk devoted to yoghurt and cheese production. They are much fewer in proportion to other cadres of milk traders.
Labour requirements in small-scale milk marketing activities include milk collection, transportation, processing and sale, 
creating direct and indirect employment. Direct employees are those who are occupied with milk marketing and processing 
on a daily basis and include the farmer, his/her family and paid labour.  Indirect employees are those involved in providing 
services to the dairy industry, e.g. feed providers or artisans repairing farm equipment, bicycles, etc. The overall number of 
both direct and indirect jobs created in the marketing segment of the supply chain varied from 14 to 20 for every 1,000 litres 
traded on a daily basis, depending on type and scale of enterprise (Table 6). This suggests that a significant number of jobs 
are created considering the volume of milk that is traded via various intermediaries daily.
On average, informal milk marketing generates 18 jobs for every 1,000 litres of milk that is handled daily; this includes 15 
direct job opportunities and three indirect jobs. The formal sector generates less employment per 1,000 litres of milk handled 
on a daily basis (total of 15) with 14 direct jobs and one indirect job. Scaling out the employment effects to cover the whole 
country, formal milk processing and marketing generates about 19, 000 jobs compared to the informal marketing that creates 
more than 41,000 employment opportunities to yield a gross total of about 60,000 jobs. 
Further, these are relatively well remunerated jobs. From this study, it is estimated that formal employment in milk processing 
and marketing provides an average monthly wage of KSh 11, 936 ($150) while informal market agents earn an average of 
KSh 8,992 ($125), both much higher than the Government’s minimum wage guideline of $43. 
39
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Aggregate Milk 
quantities Handled 
(000’L/day)†
Rate of employment 
generation (Jobs /1000L 
handled daily) §
Scaling out the number 
of jobs generated 
country-wide ¢
Mean Wage
(KSh. / Month)
Formal Processing & marketing
Informal Marketing agents
Direct sales from farms to consumers
Formal processing & marketing
Processing factory 
Collection of raw milk
Distribution of processed dairy products
Retail of processed dairy products
Total number of jobs
Informal Marketing
Informal Marketing
Direct employment
Indirect employment
Total number of jobs
Formal processing & marketing
Formal processing & marketing
Informal marketing agents
Total
Indirectly through supply of
material & services to processors
Total
Small-scale 
Large-scale
Total 
Small-scale 
Large-scale
Weighted Mean
Small-scale 
Large-scale
Weighted Mean
Small-scale 
Large-scale
Weighted Mean
Small-scale 
Large-scale
Total
73 (1%)
1,409 (23%)
2,549
11.6
0
0
3.1
1.2
15.9
17
3
20
1,163
28,177
7,810
9,550
12,199
8,137
11,936
8,992
11
3
14
15 (83%)
 3 (17%)
18
4.5
5.2
1.4
3.1
1.2
15.4
4.8 (32%)
5.0 (22%)
1.3   (8%)
3.1 (20%)
1.2   (8%)
15.4(100%)
1,734 (46%)
29,340
17,650
12,863
30,513
18,813
41,041
59,854
2,041 (54%)
6,096 (100%)
1,146 (19%)
919 (15%)
0
1,219 (20%)
2,328 (38%)
2,549 (42)
† Numbers in brackets show the percentage market share for each category of milk marketing agent.
§ Numbers in brackets indicate the percentage contribution to the total number of jobs per 1000L of milk handled on a  
   daily basis by each activity in the formal and also informal milk marketing sectors.
¢ Some minor differences may be observed between these figures and the products of the figures of rate of employment  
   and quantities of milk as from this table because of the rounding off that has been done when reporting these figures.
Table 6: Traded volumes, employment and wage effects in milk marketing
40
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
References
Baltenweck, S. Staal, L. Njoroge, F. Wanyoike, 
P.Ochungo, E. Kariuki (2005).Targeting Pro-Poor 
Investment in the Kenyan Dairy Sub-Sector. A  report 
prepared for IFAD and the Government of Kenya to assist 
targeting of interventions under the “Smallholder Dairy 
Commercialization Programme” International Livestock 
Research Institute. Nairobi
Cees de Haan, Henning Steinfeld and Harvey Blackburn 
(1997) Livestock & the Environment : Meeting the 
challenge. Commision of European Communities and 
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations. 
United Kingdom.
ERSWEC 2003: Economic Recovery Strategy for Wealth 
and Employment creation 2003-2007 Government of 
Kenya. Government Printers, Nairobi.
FAO (1985). Forage plant development and seed production 
in Kenya. Project findings and recommendations. Rome 
AG.DP/KEN/80/003, Terminal Report. 61pp.
Muriuki, H., Omore, A., Hooton, N., Waithaka, M., 
Ouma, R., Staal, S.J. and Odhiambo, P. 2003. The policy 
environment in the Kenya dairy sub-sector: A review. 
Smallholder Dairy (Research and Development) Project 
Report
Mwangi D M, Giller K E, Thorpe W and Thomas D 
(1998). Effect of intercropping with herbacious legumes 
on the yield and quality of Napier grass in Central 
highlands of Kenya. Paper presented to NARP II KARI/
DFID end of project conference. Pp421-422
Smallholder Dairy Project (2004a) Public health issues in 
Kenyan milk markets. SDP Policy Brief No. 4. Smallholder 
Dairy (R&D) Project.  www.smallholderdairy.org
Smallholder Dairy Project (SDP). 2005. The uncertainty 
of cattle numbers in Kenya.  SDP Policy Brief No. 10. 
Smallholder Dairy (R&D) Project. www .smallholderdairy.org
Smallholder Dairy Project (SDP).  (2004c). Employment 
generation in the Kenya dairy industry. SDP Policy 
Brief No. 2. Smallholder Dairy (R&D) Project. www.
smallholderdairy.org
Smallholder Dairy Project (2004b). Competitiveness of 
the smallholder dairy enterprise in Kenya. SDP Policy 
Brief No. 3. Smallholder Dairy (R&D) Project. www.
smallholderdairy.org 
SRA 2004. Strategy for revitalising agriculture 2004–2014. 
Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Livestock and 
Fisheries Development. Government Printers, Nairobi.
Staal, S. and Thornton, P. (2004)   Approaches for 
targeting small farmers: application to fodder technologies 
and some lessons learned.  Invited presentation, SLP 
Workshop on Strategies for Targeting and Scaling-out 
Fodder Technologies. ICRISAT, Hyderabad, India. Sept 
21, 2004.
Staal, S., Chege, L., Kenyanjui, M., Kimari, A., Lukuyu, 
B., Njubi, D., Owango, M., Tanner, J., Thorpe, W. and 
Wambugu, M. (1998). Characterisation of dairy systems 
supplying the Nairobi milk market: a pilot survey in 
Kiambu District for the identification of target groups of 
producers. Smallholder Dairy (R&D) Project Report.
Staal, S., Owango, M., Muriuki, H., Kenyanjui, M., 
Lukuyu, B., Njoroge, L., Njubi, D., Baltenweck, I., 
Musembi, F., Bwana, O., Muriuki K., Gichungu, G., 
Omore, A. and Thorpe, W. (2001). Dairy systems 
characterisation of the greater Nairobi milk shed. 
Smallholder Dairy (R&D) Project report
Staal, S.J., Baltenweck, I., Waithaka, M.M., de Wolff, T. 
and Njoroge, L. 2002. Location and uptake: integrated 
household and GIS analysis of technology adoption and 
land use, with application to smallholder dairy farms in 
Kenya. Agricultural Economics 27:295-315.
Staal, S.J., Delgado, C., Baltenweck, I., Kruska, R., 
2000. Spatial aspects of producer milk price formation in 
Kenya: A joint household-GIS approach. In: Proceedings 
of the Contributed Paper, International Association of 
Agricultural Economics Meetings, Berlin, August 2000.
Staal, S.J., Waithaka, M., Njoroge, L., Mwangi, D.M., 
Njubi, D. and Wokabi, A. (2003). Costs of milk 
production in Kenya: Estimates from Kiambu, Nakuru 
and Nyandarua districts. SDP Research and Development 
Report No. 1. Smallholder Dairy (R&D) Project
Staal, S.J., Waithaka, M., Njoroge, L., Mwangi, D.M., 
Njubi, D. and Wokabi, A. 2003. Costs of milk production 
in Kenya: Estimates from Kiambu, Nakuru and Nyandarua 
districts. SDP Research and Development Report No. 1. 
Smallholder Dairy (R&D) Project.
Stotz, D. 1983. Production techniques and economics of 
smallholder livestock production systems in Kenya. Farm 
Management Handbook of Kenya, Vol. IV. Ministry of 
Livestock Development, Nairobi.
Tothill, J. C. (1986). The role of legumes in farming 
systems of sub-Saharan Africa. Proceedings of a Workshop 
held at ILCA, Addis Ababa Ethiopia, 16-Sept. 1985 ‘on 
the potentials of forage legumes in the farming systems of 
sub-Saharan Africa. Pp. 162-182.
Utiger, C., Romney, D., Njoroge, L., Staal, S., Lukuyu, 
B. and Chege, L. (2000). Nutrient flows and balances 
in intensive crop-dairy production systems in the 
Kenya highlands.  Paper presented at the 3rd All Africa 
Conference on Animal Agriculture and 11th Conference 
of the Egyptian Society of Animal Production, 6-9 
November 2000, Alexandria, Egypt.
Valk, Y.S. 1990. Review report of DEAF survey during 
1989. Ministry of Livestock Development, Nairobi, 
Kenya. pp.69.
World Bank, (2003) World Development Indicators. 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/
THE WORLD BANK Washington, DC. USA
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Annexe 
Statistical model used in estimating probability of adoption of interventions
A qualitative response model was used to estimate probability of adoption of dairy interventions. Qualitative models lend 
themselves well to the analyses of models where the response variable is binary in nature (either 0 or 1). The response variable 
here is whether the technology/innovation has been adopted or not (1 if adopted, 0 otherwise), while the explanatory 
variables are the socio-economic and agro-climatic factors hypothesized to influence adoption or non-adoption. The logit 
[KRS7] and probit models fall in this family of qualitative response models. The logistic model was used in the current 
analysis. This model is based on the cumulative logistic probability function and specified as:
 
In this notation, e represents the base of natural logarithms, which is approximately equal to 2.718.   is the probability that 
an individual will make a certain choice, given knowledge of . The model above can be expressed as:
 This is the form used in the estimation of the logistic regression model. The dependent variable is the logarithm of 
the odds that a particular choice will be made and is linear to the explanatory variables X i   (Maddala, 1983 [KRS8] ). The 
coefficients estimated from the model are transformed through a process of exponentiation to represent the marginal 
probabilities rather than coefficients of odds ratios. These coefficients are then used in predicting probabilities of adoption 
of the particular innovation. 
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers.