

Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Section 1
Introduction: Concepts,
methods and rationale
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Introduction
This easy-to-use guide to effective targeting of selected dairy interventions in Kenya is intended for use by anyone involved 
in dairy farming in the country, such as development planners, researchers, service providers, suppliers of dairy inputs 
and extension workers. The guide answers the question often faced by these workers: where is their proposed intervention 
most likely to be adopted? 
Using a combination of Geographical Information Systems (GIS) mapping methods and economic regression techniques, 
this guide shows where and under what circumstances dairy technologies are most likely to succeed.
Structure of the guide
The guide is divided into three sections. The first section deals with concepts, rationale and methodologies for targeting 
dairy interventions. It also explains, with examples, how to use the guide. 
The second section presents the targeting maps for various dairy interventions. A total of eleven dairy interventions are 
considered in this guide. For each, a map shows relative probability of adoption together with a description of the innovation 
and background information. Also presented are the socio-economic, biophysical and agro-climatic characteristics that 
predispose uptake of each intervention.
The third section presents some policy-relevant research results in three topical areas: 
• Cost of milk production 
• Evaluation and assessment of alternative milk preservation techniques 
• Employment generation in the dairy marketing chain. 
What is targeting of interventions?
Targeting of interventions involves the systematic identification of domains where the probability of adoption is high 
and where promotional efforts can most effectively be focused. Targeting can be based on various approaches, such as 
identification of sub-populations of people, but this guide is based on identification of geographical areas. It uses spatial 
data to predict the likelihood of adoption of innovations by individual decision makers, i.e. farmers.
Effective targeting by geographical area requires four key questions to be answered: 
• Can the intervention work in this area?
• Is there demand for the intervention in this area? 
• What is the probability of adoption in this area?
• If the intervention is adopted, what impact will be achieved? 
Impact is created when the intervention solves existing significant constraints faced by the farmers or creates new 
opportunities, and thus contributes to enhanced productivity and profitability which can alleviate poverty – by providing 
cash income or improving household nutritional status. Potential uptake of innovation is expressed in the form of 
probabilities: where probability is estimated at 30%, it means that on average 30 out of every 100 farmers in the defined 
domain will adopt the intervention once it is disseminated. 
1
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Why targeting is important
Effective targeting increases the success rate of dairy development interventions. People involved in dissemination activities 
- whether from the public or private sectors - want to be assured that their efforts and investments in dissemination activities 
will result in adoption and create the required impact. In this guide, targeting matches selected dairy interventions with 
the geographical areas to which they are most suited and where impacts will be greatest. 
Likelihood of adoption is affected by geo-spatial factors, such as annual precipitation and temperatures, human population 
density, and socio-economic factors, such as household incomes, labour availability, experience and education of the 
household head, size of land and market access amongst others. These socioeconomic factors (such as wealth, scale of 
operation, age of farmer, degree of intensification, ethnicity, or economic viability of enterprise) can be used to target 
better agricultural interventions and improve distribution of impacts. The inclusion of social and economic factors helps 
to addresses the questions of where interventions can make a major contribution to alleviating poverty in ways that are 
socially equitable, ecologically sound and economically efficient. For example, concentration of intensive dairying beyond 
a certain point can cause harmful nutrient loading and targeting can help create an appropriate balance of crop-dairy 
systems (Utiger et al., 2000, de Haan et al., 1997). Many development projects are applying these approaches for targeting 
pro-poor investments and other equity considerations: Baltenweck et al., (2005) for example, use spatial and non-spatial 
targeting approaches to introduce pro-poor approaches in a project funded by the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD) in Kenya. 
Approaches to targeting
Depending on the availability of data and information, two approaches to targeting are possible: observation-based and 
criteria-based. 
Observation-based targeting
This involved observing where a particular innovation has been adopted, plotting these sites on a map and identifying 
which common characteristics the sites share. Targeting of the intervention can then be directed to other areas that share 
these same characteristics. 
The method of observation based technology mapping has been described by (Staal et al., 2002) and follows these steps:
1. Household and other characteristics from survey data and GIS derived data are used in a statistical model (see logistic 
regression model described in appendix 1) to predict adoption of the dairy technology. This model identifies significant 
characteristics of adopting farmers and uses this to predict probability of adoption. NB: Traditional technology adoption 
models often use only survey-derived data for all variables, some of which are difficult to interpret and cannot be usefully 
mapped. Often representative numbers are used for variables such as district. 
2. Having predicted the model with GIS and survey data, we predict a second model using only the significant GIS-
derived variables, with all other survey factors held constant at their mean. The two models have been compared and found 
to be more or less the same in explanatory and predictive power. However, the second model, given its variable GIS data, 
can be used for spatial prediction of adoption.     
3. This second model is mapped.
2
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
The following example illustrates how this can be done for adoption of Napier grass as a fodder crop.
STEP 2: Since only variables for which GIS surfaces are available can be used to make
spatial predictions, we compare complete models where both significant GIS and
survey variables are allowed to change and models where only significant GIS
variables are allowed to vary (all other variables being held constant at their mean).
These two approaches are found to have similar predictive powers
STEP 1:  Where has Napier been
adopted? Characteristics from survey
and GIS data are used in a statistical
model (logistic model described in
appendix 1) to predict adoption of the
dairy technology – this model
ʻcomparesʼ significant attributes of
farmers who have adopted and those
who have not adopted. Traditional
technology adoption models use only
survey data, for both household
characteristics and location variables
which are estimated using proxies for
district and farmer estimates for
distance.
What characteristics do
technology-adopting farmers
have in common?
•Length of growing period
•Access to markets
•Farming systems
•Off-farm income sources
•Climatic conditions
•
82.30% Matched Predictions
STEP 3: Models using
only GIS variables
(household and other
characteristics held
constant at their means)
are used to map
probabilities of adoption
spread over the relevant
areas.  The predictions are
found to be just as good as
predictions based on
survey variables only
Figure 1: Napier grass adoption targeting using observations approach 
(Adapted from Staal and Thornton, 2004)
The survey and GIS variables used in this guide are contained in Table 1
Criteria-based targeting
Unlike observation-based targeting, which relies on survey data (observations), this approach is based on expert opinion. 
The expert suggests parameters likely to be associated with uptake of the intervention, such as specific climate, market 
access and other conditions.
The area where each criterion exists is mapped and, by overlaying the individual layers, the area where all criteria are 
satisfied is identified: this is the area where (in the opinion of the experts) it is most likely that the intervention will be 
adopted. This area of confluence is refereed to as the ‘recommendation domain’ for adoption of the particular technology. 
This method can be used when detailed household survey data are not available but is entirely dependent on the quality 
of the expert opinion.
It is instructive to note that in targeting interventions, social and economic criteria are often much more critical to success 
of the intervention than natural and technical requirements; as a result some of the technologies targeted in this guide have 
taken these into consideration. Table 2 provides a list of the criteria used in developing maps in this guide.
3
Roads layer: e.g. areas with
smaller distances on all weather
roads to urban are as
Population density layer: e.g.
areas with greater than 50 0
people per square kilometre
Rainfall layer: e.g. areas with
greater than 3,000 mm rainfall per
year
Elevation: e.g. areas between 25 0
and 750 meters above sea level
Cattle density layer: e.g. areas with
top 50 % of grade cattle density
Recommendation domain
combining all layers. This
composite layer shows where
expert criteria intersect.
Figure 2: How criteria layers are superimposed to create a targeting map 
(Adapted from Staal and Thornton 2004)
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) layers
GIS combine layers of information about a place to give a better understanding of that place. The information could be 
about market access, demographics, agro-climatic, cattle densities, amongst others. Conceptually, superimposing one 
layer on another combines the information of the two layers, thus providing multiple information sets, for example, about 
access to market and demographic characteristics.
 
GIS analysis is rapidly becoming an important tool in assessing potential for technology use. There is no doubt that spatial 
factors represented as GIS layers can show key influences to adoption of dairy interventions. For example, rainfall has been 
found to be closely related to adoption of certain interventions, such as planted fodder and even keeping dairy cattle. In 
this targeting guide, GIS derived data was used either separately (in criteria-based targeting) or in combination with survey 
derived data (in observation-based targeting) to predict where the probability of adoption is highest. As observed by Staal 
et al., (2002), only the variables for which GIS layers are available can be used to make useful spatial predictions. Survey 
variables such as age of household head, experience or years of education, while important in determining adoption of 
technologies, do not lend easily to mapping.
Below we present some of the GIS layers used in the guide and briefly explain how they were generated and how we expect 
them to influence adoption of the different dairy interventions.
4
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Below we present some of the GIS layers used in the guide and briefly explain how they were generated and how we expect 
them to influence adoption of the different dairy interventions.
• Human population density is computed as the number of persons per square kilometre. It is derived from the 1999     
   census data of the Kenya Central Bureau of Statistics. The data resolution is at sub-locational level. 
• Areas of high human population density correspond to centres of high milk consumption where producers are likely    
  to be able to sell their milk production locally. Also, population pressure is seen as a key driving factor for uptake of      
  productivity enhancing interventions as high demand motivates farmers to increase their productivity.
Figure 4: Human population density layer 
• Calculated as the ratio of precipitation over potential evapo-transpiration (PPE). 
• For the Kenyan Highlands, the higher the PPE, the higher the potential for keeping dairy cattle. This is because
   higher PPE provides good conditions for growing forage, a key input in dairy production. 
• High PPE is also mostly associated with high altitude and thus temperate climatic conditions suitable for rearing dairy cattle.
Figure 3: Agro-climatic potential layer.
5
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
• Based on the Kenya highlands road network reflecting the road infrastructure in 2000.
• Nairobi, with approximately 2.14 million persons according to the 1999 census, is the largest metropolis in Kenya and   
  constitutes the largest market for surplus milk produced in rural areas. Proximity to Nairobi is an indicator of good       
  market access and also access to administrative and technical services based in the city.
• This layer was created using the Department of Livestock Development’s district annual reports for 1995.
   Divisional level data was used.
• The map clearly shows current areas of high dairy cattle concentration.

Years of farming experience for the hh head
Age of the household (hh) head
Years of formal education for hh head
Landholding of hh in acres
Annual precipitation/potential evapo-
transpiration (PPE)
Total road distance (km) from hh to Nairobi
Distance from homestead to a medium size
urban centre on tarmac road
Tarmac road distance to nearest urban centre
All-weather earth road distance to urban centre
Dry-weather only road distance to nearest
urban centre
Percentage of hhs in the sub-location with
stated access to formal milk outlets
Distance of the hh from the nearest qualiﬁed
veterinary service provider
Mean human population density, 5 km radius
Percentage of hhs in the sub-location with
stated access to extension services
Male headed households are likely to have better access to information and services
Longer farming experience predisposes farmer to better farming techniques 
through ‘learning by doing’
Age comes with experience and better management skills
More formal education is likely to increase farmer capacity for management and for 
utilizing information
Larger landholding implies more land available for cattle keeping but may reduce 
the need for concentrate feeding
Availability of extension services implies support for the dairy enterprise in general
Local availability of formal milk outlets implies reliable milk market, providing 
incentive to invest in dairy enterprise
Greater distance to a vet implies decreased access to livestock services.
High population density is expected to correspond with high demand for milk and 
thus favourable local market; however it may imply pressure on land holdings
Higher PPE corresponds to more favourable agro-climatic conditions for dairy 
production
Greater distance to Nairobi implies reduced access to milk markets and livestock 
services, lower milk prices and higher input prices   
Greater distance to an urban centre implies reduced market access.
Greater distance along main roads to urban centres is expected to reduce prices in 
milk markets, and raise prices and reduce availability of inputs and services
Greater distance along secondary roads  reduces milk prices while raising prices and 
reducing availability of inputs and services 
Greater distance along seasonal roads will reduce access to input and output 
markets, and increase seasonal risks
GIS criteria layers
Basis for layer
Roads layer
Travel time layer
Rainfall grid
Population density layer
Improved cattle density layer
Household poverty layer 
Milk surplus (or deﬁcit) layer
Market access layer
Tis layer  allows speciﬁcation of criteria based on distance over given road types (all weather, 
tarmac, etc) to the speciﬁc urban centres, towns etc  
Tis layer allows experts to give limits on how long a farmer can travel to a market or nearby 
town using a speciﬁed means of transport for a technology to be considered viable.
Te rainfall grid allows expert selection of areas on the basis of total annual rainfall or precipi-
tation / evapo-transpiration (PPE) .
Allows identiﬁcation of areas with certain speciﬁc population densities (people per square 
kilometer).
Usually expressed as percentage of total cattle population, this layer provides experts with 
option to select areas with relatively greater or lesser improved cattle densities.
While other layers (such as roads) can be used as proxies for market access, this layer is a 
simple average of total distance values weighted by population.
Tis layer provides percentages of households within given income brackets, such as the 
poverty line ( US$1 a day).
Surplus is excess of milk production over consumption in an area. Deﬁcit is shortfall of milk 
production below consumption in an area.
7
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Section 2
Dairy Interventions
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Improved dairy cattle
Market-oriented dairy farming using exotic cattle started in Kenya almost a century ago when European settlers introduced 
dairy cattle breeds from their native countries.  Crossbred cattle dairy production by Africans began in 1954 when a 
colonial policy paper, the Swynnerton Plan, allowed them for the first time to engage in commercial agriculture. Today 
it is estimated that Kenya has up to 6.7 million dairy cattle (SDP, 2005) and about 1.8 million households who rely on 
dairying. Significantly, thousands of jobs are created within the dairy milk marketing chains; these employment effects of 
dairying are discussed on page 32 .  
Factors used to predict probability of adoption of improved dairy cattle, derived from statistical analysis of survey 
and other spatial data, were:
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
• Total distance to Nairobi: closeness to Nairobi associated with adoption.
• Nearness to roads: closeness to roads associated with adoption.
• Education level of head of household: more years of education associated with adoption.
• Years of farming experience of head of household: more years of farming experience associated with adoption.
8
Why improved dairy cattle?
• Improved dairy cattle produce on average 6-times as much milk per year as zebu cattle: 1,500 kg of milk per
   lactation  compared to zebu which produce an average of 250 kg. 
•  Other productivity indicators, such as age at first calving and growth rate, are also superior compared to local zebu cattle. 
•  Improved cattle are more efficient in converting feed to milk. 
•  Improved dairy animals are also larger and therefore fetch higher prices when sold for meat.
•  Improved dairy cattle are suited to intensive production systems where land is limited; they provide better
    returns to investments in the intensive production systems.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 7: Predicted probability of adoption of dairy cattle
Interpretation and discussion of the map
This map shows the predicted probabilities of adoption of improved dairy animals. It combines the spatial mapping of the 
factors predisposing adoption of improved dairy cattle: favourable climates, good market access, and experience/ exposure 
of the dairy farmer, to predict probability of adoption.
The different colours represent differences in predicted probabilities of adoption of the innovation: the darker the shading 
the higher the likelihood of adoption. 
Low probability (lighter colours) implies a lower chance of adoption of improved dairy cattle because of unfavourable 
climate and/or socio-economic factors.
From the map, Kiambu is seen to show between 75% and 100% probability of adoption owing to the convergence of all 
major predisposing factors. In contrast, places such as Mbeere show less than 25% likelihood of adoption because they are 
further away from large, formal markets and have lower rainfalls.
9
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Zero-grazing
In the Kenyan Highlands, two distinct feeding systems for dairy cattle can be distinguished: zero-grazing, also known as 
stall feeding, and open grazing. In some textbooks they are called intensive and extensive feeding systems, respectively. In 
between the zero-grazing and open grazing feeding systems, lies semi zero-grazing or semi-intensive feeding system which 
combines stall feeding and open grazing
In zero-grazing, cattle are confined in stalls and all their feed requirements are brought to them. In open grazing, cattle 
are kept on pasture where they obtain the largest proportion of their feed, often with some additional supplementation 
during milking. The choice of the feeding system is normally motivated by a desire to optimize the limiting resource. In 
areas of high population density, land tends to be the limiting factor whereas in open grazing labour is the limiting factor. 
Expenditure on purchased feeds and concentrates are higher in zero-grazing system than in open grazing.  
Why zero-grazing system?
•   Allows for optimal utilization of land in situations where land is a limiting factor. For example, in areas of
    high population density where farm size tends to be small.
•  Intensive systems give higher output and productivity per cow or unit area of land.
•   Zero-grazing reduces the number of pests (especially ticks and intestinal worms) since the animals do not
    graze on infested pastures. 
•   It reduces risk of damage to crops caused by straying cattle. 
Factors used to predict probability of adoption of zero-grazing, derived from statistical analysis of survey and other 
spatial data were:
• Farm size: smaller farm size associated with adoption.
• Human population density: higher population densities associated with adoption.
• Total distance to Nairobi: closeness to Nairobi associated with adoption.
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
10
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 8: Predicted probability of adoption of zero-grazing
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The darker the shading, the higher the probability of adoption of zero-grazing. Adoption of zero-grazing is largely driven by 
the density of human population suggesting that adoption of zero-grazing technology is a reaction to growing population 
pressure: variables such as population density, farm size and proximity to Nairobi all show significant correlation with 
adoption of zero-grazing.
Favourable climates, evidenced by higher precipitation, lead to higher adoption of zero-grazing but other agricultural 
enterprises compete for land in such high potential areas, pushing dairying towards greater intensification.
Highly populated areas in central Kenya, such as around Nairobi and parts of the Rift Valley, show the highest likelihoods 
of adoption of zero-grazing.
 
11
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Concentrate feeding
Concentrates are energy, protein; fat or mineral supplements fed to dairy cattle and are used to supplement fibrous forages 
and fodder that constitute the basal diet. Many concentrates are by-products from cereal production but they also include 
by-products from other crops, such as oilseeds, as well as feeds derived from animal sources, such as meat and bone meal. 
Effective supplementary feeding of concentrates is critical to the success of all dairy farms. 
The main factors influencing the response, in terms of increased milk production, to concentrate feeding are genetic 
potential for milk production, stage of lactation,  feeding level in relation to milk production, heat stress,  pasture 
availability and nutrient content,  substitution rate of the concentrate for pasture,  quality of concentrates. However, 
to justify using concentrates, the cost must at least be matched by increased milk production. The optimum amount of 
dietary energy and protein to maximise profits is therefore determined by the interaction of cow and feed factors, as well 
as feed costs and milk prices. 
Overall in Kenya, less than 20% of the farmers use concentrates (Staal et al., 2001) and even this figure has been declining 
due to rising costs relative to prices paid out for milk. However, close to major towns the use of concentrates increases to as 
high as 70%, for instance in Kiambu district, (Staal et al. 1998) and reduces to less than 10% of the households in districts 
farther away from urban centres. Many farmers use small amounts of concentrates to relax the cows when milking and not 
really for increased milk production; we however do not consider this to be true adoption of concentrate feeding.
Adoption of concentrates is also affected by the quality of the concentrates available. The perception that manufactured 
animal feeds may be of questionable quality has been a recurring policy issue in Kenya (Muriuki et al., 2003)
12
Why concentrate feeding?
• To achieving high milk production
• Higher stocking rates are possible, increasing the income per hectare.
• The growth of heifers and cows that have not reached mature size is promoted. This increases their appetite
   and milk production in current and future lactations.
• Cows fed supplements maintain better body condition score when pasture availability is low. This increases         
  their ability to reach their milk yield potential and helps reduce the time of their first oestrus after calving.
• Allows flexibility to increase milk production when milk prices are high.
• Appropriate supplementation can increase milk protein content when the energy intake from pasture is low.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Factors used to predict the probability of adoption of concentrate feeding, derived from statistical analysis of survey and 
other spatial data were:
• Increasing market access, as indicated by distances to urban centres: shorter distance associated with adoption.
• Total distance to Nairobi: closeness to Nairobi associated with adoption.
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
• Years of formal education and years of farming experience are some of the human capital (survey derived) variables          
   influencing adoption trends; while acreage kept under maize was also an important factor in influencing the use of     
   concentrates. See also Staal et al 2002.
Figure 9:  Predicted probability of adoption of concentrate feeding
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The darker shading corresponds to areas where probability of adoption of concentrate feeding is highest. From the map 
we can see that the use of concentrates is usually but not necessarily practiced in areas around towns. Market access 
is important: the shorter road distance to urban centres - proxy for good market access - are associated with use of 
concentrates.
Farmers who live in areas with high rainfall use more concentrates. This may be related to the presence of improved cattle 
in these areas: concentrates are normally fed only to improved cattle.
13
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Napier grass
Napier grass (Pennisetum purpureum) is an improved fodder crop, especially important in cut-and-carry systems (zero-
grazing), and can produce large quantities of forage. Napier grass is a fast growing, deeply rooted, perennial grass growing 
up to 4 metres tall that can spread by underground stems to form thick ground cover. Napier grass is best suited to high 
rainfall areas but it is relatively drought-tolerant and can also grow well in drier areas. It does not, however, grow well in 
waterlogged areas. It can be grown along with forage legumes, around field boundaries and along contour lines or terraces 
to help control erosion. Napier grass is best suited to low to medium altitudes, but can grow in a wide range of well 
drained soils. It is ready for harvest three to four months after planting and harvesting can be repeated every six to eight 
weeks for up to five years.
Yields depend on agro-ecological zone and management but on average Napier gives 12 to 25 tonnes per hectare of dry 
matter per year. Much higher yields are possible with application of fertiliser and better management, creating a possibility 
for surplus production which can be conserved for feeding in the dry season.
Factors used to predict probability of adoption of Napier grass, derived from statistical analysis of survey and other 
spatial data, were:
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
• Human population density: higher population densities associated with adoption.
• Greater market access represented by shorter distances to urban centres: farmers who are able to sell more milk are
   more likely to use Napier.   
• Total distance to Nairobi: closeness to Nairobi associated with adoption.
• Educational level of head of household: more years of education associated with adoption.
14
Why Napier grass? 
• It is an improved high-yielding fodder crop.
• Produces large biomass per hectare compared to other forage crops.
• Adapted to different climatic conditions, from moderate to very high rainfall areas. However, not suited to
  very  high altitudes because it is susceptible to frost.
• Can help controls maize stalk borer by trapping the ovipositing moths if planted around maize (the ‘pull’  
         
   component of the push-  pull approach; Desmodium constitutes the ‘push’). 
• Can prevent soil erosion and excessive run-off.
• It has deep roots, so it is fairly drought resistant.
• The tender, young leaves and stems are very palatable to livestock.
• Napier grass grows fast.
• Can remain productive for up to 5 years (it is a perennial crop) removing the need for annual replanting.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 10: Predicted probability of adoption of Napier grass
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The darker the shading, the higher the probability of adoption of Napier grass. The darker areas receive high rainfall 
and have high human population density. Access to milk market, as indicated by presence of milk collection centres and 
proximity to Nairobi are also associated with adoption. In summary, adoption of Napier grass is more likely in intensive 
or intensifying market-oriented production systems.
15
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Utilisation of crop residues
Crop residues are the portions of the harvested crop that remains after the grain or other primary product is removed.
The most common crop residues used by the small-scale farmers in Kenya are:
• maize stovers 
• green maize stalks
• sweet potato vines
• banana pseudo-stems and leaves
• vegetable waste
• sugar cane tops
• bean and soybean hulls
• crushed maize grain (rejects)
• sunflower heads
• wheat, barley or oat straw
These crop residues often make up a sizeable contribution to the total available feed supply, especially in the smallholder 
dairy production systems where land holdings are too small for fodder production. On Kenyan smallholdings, an estimated 
40% of annual forage energy is derived from crop residues (Stotz, 1983). The quality of various crop residues is determined 
by the protein and energy or digestible dry matter (DDM) content of the particular residue. All crop residues possess their 
highest quality at the time of grain harvest and decline in quality the longer they remain in the field.
Two methods that can enhance the quality of residues are: 
• harvest early to capture maximum residue quality.
• use of chemical treatments, primarily anhydrous ammonia, although the latter is rarely economically viable.   
Why feed crop residues?
• Dry crop residues from cereals, such as maize or sorghum stover, are relatively easy to store for use in times of  
   feed scarcity and often available in relatively large quantities. Although generally they have a low nutritive
   value  they can support reasonable milk yields if fed with a supplement of high nutritive value, such as
   concentrates, legume fodder, etc.
• Some residues, such as sweet-potato vines or vegetable waste, although generally only available in small
  quantities can be of high nutritive value and can be used as supplements. 
• Use of crop residues helps to create important synergies in crop-livestock farming systems;  crop residues are fed to  
   cattle, reducing the need for planted or purchased fodder, while manure from the cattle is used in the
   field to grow crops thus recycling nutrient and helping to maintain soil fertility. This ensures that there
   are multiple benefits and cost savings from each enterprise.  
Factors that increased the likelihood of adoption of crop residues derived from statistical analysis of survey and other 
spatial data, were:
• Total distance to Nairobi: closeness to Nairobi associated with adoption.
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
• Human population density: higher population densities associated with adoption.
16
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 11: Predicted probability of adoption of feeding crop residues
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The darker the shading, the higher the probability that feeding of crop residues will be adopted. Factors associated with 
feeding crop residues include high rainfall and factors associated with market access. High rainfall areas are normally 
heavily populated: land holdings in such areas tend to be small, increasing the need to utilise all available feed resources, 
including crop residues.
17
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Forage legumes
Forage legumes are important in the smallholder farming systems in Kenya because they are high in protein and, due to 
their ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen, can also improve soil fertility.
Research estimates (Staal et al., 2001) show that average milk yields per cow are below the genetic potential (approximately 
1500 kg per lactation for improved cattle). This can be attributed in part to lack of adequate quality feed. Napier grass 
and cereal by-products, which commonly form the bulk of roughage for dairy cows, are generally low in crude protein, 
especially so during the dry season. Commercial protein sources that could supplement these roughages are too expensive 
for many smallholder dairy farmers to afford on a regular basis and in adequate amounts (FAO, 1985; Valk, 1990). 
Production and utilisation of forage legumes is one of the low-cost methods for improving both the quantity and quality 
of livestock feeds on smallholder farms. The legumes can also concurrently enhance soil fertility for companion fodder 
grasses and subsequent cereal crops (Tothill, 1986, Mwangi et al., 1998) thereby reducing the cost of livestock feed and 
crop production for the resource poor farmer.
Criteria for predicting likelihood of adoption of Desmodium and Calliandra, derived from expert opinion and 
spatial data:
• Rainfall greater than 900mm per year
• Elevation between 250 and 750 meters above sea-level
• Human population density greater than 250 persons per km2
• Improved cattle density greater than 50 cattle per km2
18
Why forage legumes?
• Forage legume crops are high in protein and can be used to supplement diets based on low-protein basal forages
• Forage legumes can fix atmospheric nitrogen; this leads to improved soil fertility, enhanced forage and mulching    
   quality.
• Legumes can reduce the rate of decline of soil fertility, or even enhance crop yields, and can also reduce the length  
  of the fallow period. 
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Interpretation and Discussion of the Map
The dark brown colour shows areas most suited to growing Desmodium and Calliandra. These are areas where the 
natural and socio-economic recommendation criteria combine to create optimal conditions for growing Desmodium or 
Calliandra. Dissemination should target these areas. The smaller map at the top-right corner shows the way the natural 
and socio-economic domains overlap and the areas where each of the domains is met -
In this map we show that for adoption of forage legumes, technical requirements may not be sufficient and socioeconomic 
criteria need to be considered as well. For example, a large part of Western Kenya meets all the natural criteria but not the 
socio-economic criteria, and uptake of these technologies in this region may therefore require greater effort.
Figure 12: Criteria for natural and socio-economic potential for Desmodium and Calliandra
19
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Silage making
Forages can be conserved by either ensiling or hay making. In this guide, the focus will be on silage making.
Silage is the material produced by controlled fermentation of chopped crop residues or forages with high moisture 
contents. The purpose is to preserve forages through natural fermentation by achieving anaerobic conditions. The ideal 
characteristics of material for silage preservation are: an adequate level of fermentable substrate (8-10% of DM) in the 
form of water soluble carbohydrate (WSC) and a dry matter (DM) content above 200g/kg. The moisture content should 
be 60-70 per cent and the pH below 4.2 (acid) for wet crops and below 4.8 for wilted silages (Lukuyu et al., 2006. In 
Kenya, Napier grass, sorghum, maize and sugarcane tops can all be made into silage.
In Kenya, the common procedures of ensiling include the use of trench silos and plastic silos. A trench silo is generally 
built underground, or semi-underground, with two solid walls. Advantages of the trench silo include ease of management 
and mechanization, e.g., where available a tractor  can be driven on top from one side to the other for compaction 
purposes. Compaction may also be achieved by applying other heavy loads or items. After compaction, it is covered with 
a plastic sheet pressed down with soil to maintain anaerobic conditions. In the plastic silo, plastic sheets or bags are used. 
These are filled with the ensiling materials and then compacted by trampling. The advantages of plastic silos are their low 
cost and the fact that they can be moved as needed.
Why silage making?
• Feed conservation, such as silage making, eases the serious feed shortages experienced in the dry season
• With adequate feed available year-round, animals remain in good condition 
• Advantage can be taken of the higher milk price in the dry season
Criteria-based targeting was used to predict where uptake of silage making is most likely to be successful. The criteria 
used include, high density of dairy cattle and appropriate agro-climatic conditions for producing feeds. However, because 
of the diversity of crops that could be ensiled, and therefore the wide range of climatic adaptability that they collectively 
allow, climate is not a major limitation. Areas with at least 900mm per annum of rainfall would be suitable for forage 
production. In addition, access to market is seen as a predisposing factor, with better access corresponding to higher chances 
that dissemination effort will succeed. Another factor that would affect adoption or non-adoption of feed conservation 
technology is the income level of the household. Adoption of this innovation entails outlay of cash (to buy polythene bags 
or dig the pit silo) and this would preclude poor households from adopting.  The criteria used are summarised overleaf.
  1Tractors are used on rental basis by significant number of “small” farmers especially in Rift Valley.
................................................................................................................................................
20
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 13: Combined domains for targeting feed conservation technology
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The dark brown colour represents areas best adapted for uptake of silage making – this is the areas where all four criteria 
converge. These include most areas in Central Province and other districts around Mount Kenya, such as Meru and Embu, 
as well as some districts in central and north Rift Valley, for example, Kericho, Molo, and areas adjoining Eldoret. 
Criteria for predicting likelihood of adoption of silage making, derived from expert opinion and spatial data:
• High density of improved dairy cattle: top 50% of dairy cattle density
• Medium human population density: between 25% and 75% of range
• Area close to a road: closest 50%
• Relatively less areas: top 50% richest locations among those living below the poverty line.
21
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Acaricide use
An acaricide is a chemical that kills ticks. The word is derived from Latin acarus, a mite and cide, kill. Acaricide are 
developed from different chemical classes. In the early 20th century arsenic, in the form of arsenic trioxide, was the only 
acaricide available. However, later organophosphorous compounds and carbonates were introduced and more recently 
amitraz and synthetic pyrethroids have become available. 
Use of acaricides has a number of inherent problems: development of resistance by ticks; environmental pollution; cost; 
and creation of enzootically unstable disease situations. However, in Kenya and other countries where tick and tick-borne 
diseases, such as ECF, cause economically significant losses, use of acaricide will continue well into the future. 
In the past, most acaricides have been used in plunge dips but other methods, especially hand spraying, are now popular 
with smallholders. 
Factors that increased the likelihood of adoption of acaricide use derived from statistical analysis of survey and other 
spatial data, were:
• Type of production system: more likely where open-grazing was practiced as opposed to zero-grazing. In fact, stall-fed   
   cattle are less susceptible to ticks borne diseases as they are confined.
• Total distance to Nairobi: adoption is associated with increased distance from Nairobi.
22
Why use acaricides?
• Tick infestation and tick borne diseases causes economically significant losses to livestock keepers.
• SDP surveys have shown (Staal et al., 2002) that of every 100 diseases reported by smallholder dairy farmers   
   in Kenya, on average 21 were ECF, a further 16 other tick-borne diseases (TBDs); in total 37% of reported    
   diseases were TBDs.
• Mortality rates from ECF infections are high.
• Treatment cost of ECF cases far outweighs cost of prevention with acaricide.
• When properly used, acaricide provide effective control of ticks, and thus the tick-borne diseases that they transmit.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 14: Predicted probability of acaricide adoption
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The areas on the map shaded darkest correspond to areas where probability of adoption of acaricide is highest. In these 
areas, challenge from ticks and tick-borne diseases is likely to be high. The dominant factor associated with a high 
probability of acaricide adoption is production system; predicted probability of adoption is high for all areas where dairy 
cattle are kept with the exception of areas like Kiambu district where the dairy system is predominantly zero-grazing. 
23
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Artificial Insemination 
To get a cow pregnant one can either use artificial insemination (AI) or natural service, that is using a bull. AI involves 
the use of semen that has been collected from selected bulls, tested for diseases and stored in individual doses at low 
temperature in liquid nitrogen. Mainly through the use of AI, Kenya has managed to upgrade and expand the national 
dairy herd population from about 300, 000 in the mid 1960s to around 6.7 million animals today. 
Prior to the privatization of AI service provision in the early 1990s, the government ran daily rounds of insemination in 
most rural areas. Inseminators passed through a fixed route each day to serve the animals brought by farmers to roadside 
cattle crushes. With the liberalization of AI provision in 1992, private practitioners who operate an ‘on call’ service 
emerged. Most farmers now have to contact the inseminator directly, by messenger or phone, and response is sometimes 
slow.  In addition, the cost has increased dramatically from KSh 1 per insemination at the height of subsidization in 1971 
to between KSh 580 and KSh 1000 for locally produced semen, and well over KSh 1,000 for imported semen.  
.
Factors that increased the likelihood of adoption of AI, derived from statistical analysis of survey and other spatial 
data, were:
• Increased market access: this is measured by total road distance (km) from homestead to the nearest urban centre.
   The shorter this distance greater the likelihood of adoption.
• Educational level of head of household: more years of education associated with adoption.
• Agro-climatic potential, expressed as PPE: higher PPE associated with adoption.
• Total distance to Nairobi: adoption is associated with decreased distance from  Nairobi.
24
Why AI?
• Leads to faster genetic improvement (or upgrading ) of the local herd. 
• Ensures widespread access to genetically superior sires.
• Even after death of sire, semen can still be used. 
• Rapid proof of quality of sires because with AI many offspring are produced in a short period. 
• The desired bull may be a great distance away; the semen can be quickly transported, saving time and money.
• Minimizes sexually transmitted diseases, e.g. brucellosis.
• Semen for AI is usually drawn from proven sires and thus superior phenotypic characteristics are transmitted to   
   the next generation. 
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 15: Predicted probability of adoption of AI
Interpretation and discussion of the map
Darker shading shows areas where there is a higher likelihood of farmers using AI technology, such as Kiambu and 
surrounding areas. From the map, it is evident that adoption of AI technology is most prevalent in the districts located 
in Central Kenya. Adoption is relatively lower in Western Province and most areas in North Rift despite indicators, like 
numbers of dairy cattle and agro-climatic potential, pointing to high potential for AI adoption.  Historical non use and 
cultural biases are some of the reasons that may be responsible for this discrepancy.   
25
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Dairy co-operatives
A cooperative is a legal entity owned by its members that usually serves to bring together and exploit the strengths of 
its individual members in the pursuit of an economic activity. Cooperatives are able to exploit economies of scale and 
enhance bargaining power when dealing with buyers and suppliers. The primary function of a dairy cooperative, at least in 
the Kenyan context, is to procure milk from farmers, bulk and standardize it and send it to the market. Some cooperatives 
have adopted vertical integration strategies and are also engaged in milk processing and distribution. Other peripheral but 
important activities of a cooperative include provision of extension services, such as breeding (artificial insemination) and 
animal health services, including vaccination and operation of mobile clinics. 
Dairy cooperatives should be located where dairy cattle and human population density is high. Dairy co-ops will have 
greatest impact in areas with surplus milk. They are, however, most needed when this surplus milk is in areas with poor 
market access. In areas where the milk surplus is in areas with good market access, dairy cooperatives can still perform well 
but there will be a greater choice of alternative marketing channels.   
Criteria for predicting likelihood of adoption of dairy cooperatives, derived from expert opinion and spatial data:
• Areas either far away, or very close to a major consumption centre; In areas far away from urban centres cooperatives  
  pool resources that overcome marketing constraints imposed by distance and poor infrastructure. On the other hand,  
  cooperatives nearer to large consumption centres make it easier for farmers to realise economies of scale and counter    
  competition from other players.
• Milk surplus is calculated as the excess of milk production over consumption in an area. Surplus milk creates the  
 
   necessity for marketing cooperatives.
26
Why dairy cooperatives?
• Effective and efficient way of marketing milk. The cooperative takes the responsibility for collecting and
   bulking the milk, transporting and selling it on behalf of the members. This function is very important because   
   marketing is a major problem in dairy development.
• Increases bargaining power when negotiating with suppliers and buyers. 
• Allows for pulling together of economic resources and thus creating synergies otherwise not available if each      
   member was to act on his/her own behalf.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 16: Combined recommendation domains for targeting of dairy co-operative development
Interpretation and discussion of the map
The dark brown areas represent regions where dairy cooperatives are most needed because they combine low market access 
with surplus milk production. Farmers in these areas are more likely to use collective marketing arrangements as they are 
unlikely to have access to alternative marketing arrangements.
The light brown areas combine high market access with high milk surplus. Farmers in these areas could still be in 
cooperatives but they also have other alternatives, such as private dairy companies and informal milk traders due to greater 
market access.
Dairy planners and development workers need to keep theses dynamics in mind when designing programs for dairy 
cooperative development.
27
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Milk preservation technology
Milk is nutritious for people but also a good medium of growth for various micro-organisms. The presence of undesirable 
bacteria in milk may cause deterioration of flavour or physical appearance and may cause disease in people. Souring of 
milk, discoloration, gassiness and many other defects are caused by the presence of different types of micro-organisms.  
Milk preservation is the process of preventing deterioration of milk quality by either maintaining low temperatures, as 
in milk coolers, or adding chemical preservatives. Lactoperoxidase (LPS) falls in the latter category and is a chemical that 
builds on the natural antibacterial effects in raw milk. 
In Kenya milk has traditionally been preserved in cold chains. This was especially true when the Kenya Cooperative 
Creameries (KCC) enjoyed a monopoly in milk marketing in Kenya and ran milk coolers in different parts of the country. 
Following the liberalization of the dairy sector and the entry of other players in the milk marketing, most of these 
coolers have become dilapidated through many years of disuse.  Although coolers can contribute significantly to reducing 
spoilage, they require high levels of technical expertise and investment to maintain, and often prove to be uneconomical, 
particularly where quantities of milk sold are small.  During the period that milk marketing has been liberalized, chemical 
preservatives have also been used extensively – albeit illegally - mostly by milk traders transporting small quantities of 
milk to the market. 
There is concern about misuse of chemicals such as hydrogen peroxide in milk preservation by some traders. Thus, there 
is a need for dissemination of ethically acceptable and technically appropriate milk preservation methods, such as LPS. 
Although use of LPS is not currently permitted in Kenya, its use has been approved by the FAO/WHO Joint Expert 
Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) and the Codex Alimentarius Commission. This process is natural and should not 
to be confused with the use of the banned and harmful chemical hydrogen peroxide. Economic viability and policy issues 
surrounding the use of LPS for milk preservation are discussed further in Section 3. 
Criteria expected to increase likelihood of adoption of milk preservation methods:
• Availability of a milk surplus: Where production exceeds demand, there will be a marketable surplus that needs to be 
moved elsewhere for sale. In these cases it is likely that the point of production is far from the point of sale and methods 
to extend shelf life are needed.  Milk surplus was estimated and divisions with the highest surpluses (50% of total) were 
considered most likely to use milk preservation.
• Areas far from the road:  Where producers are far from the road, it is likely that the milk travels further, and takes longer, 
to reach the point of collection and sale and, therefore, methods to extend shelf life are needed.  Using the road network, 
distances from the road was calculated.  25% of the area, representing sites furthest from roads, was considered most likely 
to benefit from milk preservation.
28
Why preserve milk ?
• Milk is a good medium of growth for various microbes, some of which are pathogenic.
• To prevent deterioration of quality and increase the shelf life.
• To maintain quality of milk along the value chain, particularly where the point of production is far from the   
   point of sale.
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 17: Combined recommendation domains for targeting milk preservation interventions 
The dark areas are where all factors expected to increase probability converge and therefore, likelihood of adoption is 
expected to be highest. From the map above, adoption of milk preservation technologies would be highest in Nyandarua 
and Nakuru districts within the central highlands, Kericho and Bomet in central Rift and Eldoret and Nandi in north 
Rift Valley. 
29
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Training and certification of milk traders
Itinerant milk traders are a common feature of milk marketing in Kenya. They provide an important distributional 
network, linking producers and consumers. About 86% of Kenya’s milk is sold to consumers unprocessed. Of this about 
half (44%) is marketed through informal mobile traders (23%), milk bars shops and kiosks (15%) and cooperatives (6%) 
while the other half (42%) is sold directly from farms to consumer (SDP 2004a)  
The informal traders, therefore, constitute an important component of the informal milk sector in Kenya and play an 
important role in availing milk to low income consumers. Training and certification of informal milk traders can lead to 
substantial and clear improvements in milk quality. But where will the impact of training and certification of informal 
milk traders be likely to have the greatest impact? 
To answer this question, we need to identify areas where large numbers of itinerant milk traders will be present. Milk 
traders will always be present where milk is produced for the market (as opposed to for subsistence). There are two clear 
patterns of development of informal milk trade: 
1. In areas near or around large urban centres that are densely populated with consumers who cannot afford prices
    offered by formal outlets. 
2. Informal milk trade is also active where milk surpluses are produced in remote areas where it is not economically
    viable for formal traders to source or sell milk. Some of these areas are only accessible to bicycles.
Criteria expected to increase likelihood of adoption of training and certification for milk traders:
• Milk surplus is calculated as the excess of milk production over consumption in an area. The extra milk that cannot
   be marketed through formal channels is disposed off through informal milk traders. 
• Low market access: Travel time to nearest tarmac road: by bicycle of 2 hours or more: This criterion, combined with      
   milk surplus, suggests infrastructural challenges that limit the access of milk producers in such areas by the
  formal market.
• Good market access: Travel time to nearest tarmac road: by bicycle of 30 minutes and less. This criterion, combined     
   with surplus milk, allows access to densely populated urban centres whose inhabitants cannot afford milk sold
   through formal channels.
30
Why train milk traders?
• To impart knowledge on skills, processes and procedures for safe milk handling. This is important because      
   there are public health concerns regarding milk marketed through informal channels. Training will improve          
   quality, increase shelf life, increase consumer confidence and therefore enhances profits for the informal  
    
   traders. (SDP, 2004 Training guide)
• Small scale itinerant traders are likely to be an important feature of milk trade in Kenya for a long time.  
    
  Training and certification is therefore important in making these traders responsible players in a sub-sector      
  where they are already playing a significant economic and social role.
• The informal milk sector needs to be supported and developed because it generates employment opportunities,  
   assists poor farmers in marketing their milk and avails milk to many consumers, especially the poor. .
• Traditionally, formal channels charge higher prices because of value addition and overheads associated with      
   formal marketing. Other secondary reasons for development of informal milk trade in these areas include     
   delayed payments to farmers, inappropriate milk collection or delivery procedures and unwillingness of the     
   formal sector to buy all available milk. 
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Figure 18: Combined recommendation domains for targeting training of milk traders
Interpretation and discussion of the map
Both the light brown and dark brown areas on the map represent areas where informal milk traders are likely to exist and, 
therefore, are prime areas for targeting interventions in their training and certification. In the dark brown areas, informal 
marketing develops as a result of the presence of urban populations who are unable to afford milk at prices offered by the 
formal channels, i.e. pasteurised and packaged milk. In the light brown areas, poor infrastructure, especially lack of roads, 
prevents the formal market from operating. 
31
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Section 3
Policy implications for
smallholder dairy development
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Introduction
The previous section dealt with identifying areas within Kenya where selected dairy interventions were most likely to be 
adopted so that promotion and dissemination efforts can be targeted appropriately. Technology is an important driver 
of dairy development in Kenya because increasing pressure on available land dictates that growth will come more from 
increased productivity than expansion in the scale of the dairy enterprise, such as through more land under cultivation 
or increasing size of herds of low productivity animals. But technology alone is not sufficient to sustain development in 
dairy and it has to be underpinned by appropriate and supportive policies. Indeed, the enacting and implementation of 
appropriate dairy policies would themselves be important drivers of the technology adoption process. This section looks 
at three key aspects of dairy production, presenting some results from studies conducted by the SDP and considers their 
policy implications. The aspects examined are:
• Cost of milk production
• Milk preservation along the production to marketing channel 
• Employment generation in dairy activities
Cost of milk production
Reliable estimates of the cost of milk production are important to dairy industry stakeholders including farmers, processors, 
policy makers and private dairy development agencies. This information is important for decision-making related to 
investment in dairy development relative to other enterprises, and for the design of policies to support smallholder dairy 
development. Moreover, persistent complaints by farmers that producer prices do not cover cost of milk production 
are a further justification to identify reliable estimates of the cost of milk production. Farmers and policy makers need 
a dependable benchmark upon which to base their milk supply decisions; while in a market where prices have been 
decontrolled, quantities supplied will be based on market prices, production decisions are influenced in the long term by 
costs of production relative to market prices. Policy makers can use this information to determine what tariffs to levy on 
imported dairy products to bring parity between domestic prices and prevailing world prices.
The data
Data for the cost estimates were obtained during in-depth studies of selected representative dairy farms in Kiambu, 
Nakuru and Nyandarua districts between October 1997 and March 2000. A total of 21 farm households were surveyed 
in Kiambu and 11 each for Nakuru and Nyandarua. A longitudinal survey was done during which each farm was visited 
twice weekly over some 14 months to obtain daily records of milk production and sales figures, quantities and prices of 
inputs used in the dairy enterprise, and other relevant data (SDP 2004b; Staal et al., 2003). 
No two farms are exactly the same in terms of farmer characteristics, managerial skills, technology practices and access to 
resources and the cost of milk production will vary according to these differences. To estimate cost of milk production, we 
envisaged three farm models for dairy enterprises that were deemed to be broadly representative of dairy farms in Kenya. 
These categories are described below:
i. Intensive production system: In this production system land holdings are smallest, stall-feeding is the main feeding 
practice and supplementation with purchased inputs is highest. Land is the main constraint. Kiambu district indicate 
division is representative of an area where the intensive dairy production system is practised in Kenya, i.e. high potential 
agricultural areas, with high human population density and good access to markets. 
32
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
ii. Semi-intensive production system: Land is not as serious a constraint as in the intensive production system. Open grazing 
is common and some supplementation with purchased inputs is also done. Nakuru district is representative of areas where 
the semi-intensive production system is practised in Kenya.
iii. Extensive production system: In this system, which is also called pasture production system, land is not a constraint 
and cattle are open-grazed. Land holdings are large and there is little or no supplemental feeding with purchased inputs. 
Nyandarua district is representative of areas where the extensive production system is practiced in Kenya.
The results
The estimated costs of milk production from the longitudinal surveys conducted between October 1997 and December 1998 
for Kiambu District and between November 1998 and March 2000 for Nakuru and Nyandarua Districts are presented in 
Table 3. 
Cost of production was highest in the most intensive system (Kiambu) and lowest in the most extensive system (Nyandarua), 
reflecting the costs of the high-concentrate rations used in the more intensive systems. Profits were marginally highest in 
Nyandarua at KSh 4.8 per litre, followed by Kiambu with KSh 4.1 and Nakuru with KSh 3.6 per litre while  sale price of 
milk,  was highest in Kiambu and lowest in Nyandarua.
Table 3: Cost of milk production, prices, revenues and profits
It should be noted that the ‘profits’ described here are in fact ‘above-normal profits’. This is simply because the costs of family 
labour have already been deducted from these returns. The results underline the important role of smallholder dairy production 
in sustaining rural livelihoods, smallholder dairying usually pays wages higher than those otherwise locally available. Added 
to this is the employment created through casual and long-term hired labour on even the smallest dairy farms, contributing 
to livelihoods of others within the rural community including the most resource-poor (see last section in this chapter).  
Figure 19 compares individual cost components in milk production, with revenue overlaid to allow comparison between 
total revenue and total cost from the three types of dairy enterprise. In all the three farm models, revenue exceeded cost, 
showing positive returns to dairy enterprise. 

Conclusions and policy implications
The results from the longitudinal study show clearly that in normal years, smallholder dairy producers in Kenya are able to 
capture useful profits. Based on the detailed daily household data, the dairy enterprise is demonstrated to provide above-
normal profits, meaning that returns are higher than those available through alternative rural wage labour. This is true for 
a range of dairy production practices from intensive stall-feeding systems to extensive grazing systems. The understanding 
that farmers also capture additional but unmeasured benefits, such as from the use of manure and from the insurance and 
financial values of livestock assets, further strengthens their returns and competitiveness. The resilience of smallholder dairy 
farming as a primary provider of livelihoods in many rural areas of Kenya cannot be reasonably questioned.
Results from other studies (see Staal et al, 2000) underline the important role that road infrastructure plays, particularly in 
the informal market that dominates the dairy sub-sector. These have shown that farmers who are 75 kilometres or more from 
Nairobi can receive 22% less for their milk compared to farmers closer to the urban areas. Moreover, for each additional 
kilometre of poor feeder road that separates a farm from the main road, milk price is reduced by almost KSh0.50 per litre, 
or about 3% per kilometre. The analysis also showed that simply upgrading the poor feeder roads to good murram roads 
could reduce transport costs on those roads by 30%, and raise prices paid to farmers accordingly. Poor roads also significantly 
reduce farmer access to important support services, such as animal health and artificial insemination, which have further 
suffered from reduced public support since the early 1990s. Therefore, policies that target improvement of feeder roads and 
road infrastructure are likely to have a significant positive impact on the livelihoods of dairy farmers, particularly those in 
rural areas distant from major urban centres. 

Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Poor roads also significantly reduce farmer access to important support services, such as animal health and artificial 
insemination, which have further suffered from reduced public support since the early 1990s. Therefore, policies that target 
improvement of feeder roads and road infrastructure are likely to have a significant positive impact on the livelihoods of dairy 
farmers, particularly those in rural areas distant from major urban centres.
The simulation analysis of the seasonal price changes seen in early 2002 demonstrated that under some supply conditions, 
farmers in the main milk surplus areas can be adversely affected and temporarily dairy farming can become unprofitable. 
Farmers using intensive production practices may be most vulnerable to these conditions. This may hint at greater long-term 
competitiveness of the extensive production systems if increased supply and stagnating demand lead to overall lower real 
farm-gate milk prices.
Reduction in demand is often due to economic decline, which contributes to lower disposable incomes and reduced purchase 
of milk by some Kenyan households. Efforts to raise demand through, for example, donor-funded promotional campaigns 
about the benefits of drinking milk, are likely to have limited success unless general economic conditions improve. Given the 
relatively high retail price of pasteurised milk (generally more than double the farm-gate price), efforts to reduce retail prices 
through more efficient processing and low-cost packing could be expected to have a greater effect in raising consumption.
Available evidence suggests that, for the foreseeable future, smallholder Kenya dairy farmers will continue to do well under 
a variety of production systems even though seasonal fluctuations may have temporary adverse effects on some groups. 
Significant farm-level profits, combined with continued milk deficits and high prices in some areas, particularly the western 
part of the country, suggest that public-policy support for smallholder dairy development will continue to be an effective 
means of improving farmers’ welfare and livelihoods and stimulating rural development.
35
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
An assessment of the cost and feasibility of alternative milk 
preservation systems in Kenya
Many farmers in Kenya live in areas with poor roads, where electricity is lacking or cooling is uneconomical, which leads to 
losses of milk through waste and spoilage. Some milk market agents in such remote areas use harmful and illegal chemical 
agents to preserve milk. While cooling is still the preferred method of bulk raw milk preservation, an alternative method of 
preservation using the lactoperoxidase system (LPS)  has been developed for use by small-scale farmer groups in poor milk 
market access regions. 
Although use of LPS is not currently allowed in Kenya it is an important policy option that merits discussion and consideration. 
Use of LPS has been approved by both the FAO/WHO Joint Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) and the 
Codex Alimentarius Commission which evaluates the safety of food additives and develop food standards and guidelines 
respectively. 
The results presented here touches on:
i. The financial feasibility of use of LPS compared to milk cooling and/or no preservation at all. 
ii. The potential for dairy farmers in the rural areas to increase their profitability by using LPS to preserve and sell their 
evening milk 
iii. The institutional feasibility for use of the LPS technology in milk marketing in Kenya. 
iv. The potential for LPS to replace potentially harmful chemicals used to preserve raw milk by some marketing agents. 
Approach
Cost-benefit analyses of milk preservation by cooling versus using LPS were conducted to assess their economic feasibility.
A case study of four milk coolers of varying sizes was conducted for information on the magnitude of costs involved. Data 
on costs of LPS was collected during trials with two milk collection groups in Bomet District and two private milk collection 
agents in Nyandarua District. Farmers in the two districts incur significant post-harvest losses in milk due to poor road 
infrastructure.  
Results
Milk cooling
It was found that the costs of cooling range from KSh1.10 to K.Sh1.30 per litre in large-scale chilling plants (with potential 
capacity ≥20,000 litres/ day) to about KSh1.80 in a small-scale plant (with potential capacity = 1200 litres/day). The cost 
of cooling was high when utilised capacity in the cooler was low. Electricity costs, which are among the highest in Africa, 
account for up to 30% of the cost of cooling.
Small-scale cooling was associated with a number of problems: 
i. No price premium was received for supply of chilled milk to the dairy processors even though chilling increased their       
   operational costs significantly. 
ii. The small-scale cooler was inadequately equipped (e.g. no standby generator or advanced milk quality control
    equipment) leading to frequent cases of milk spoilage. The spoilage of milk in the small-scale cooler accounted for 26%   
    of the total variable costs compared to none in any of the large scale coolers. 
2The lactoperoxidase system of milk preservation works by activating lactoperoxidase, an enzyme naturally present in milk which has a bacteriostatic effect.
It involves, first, addition and mixing of thiocyanate and, second, addition and mixing of percarbonate in good quality milk about 2 to 3 hours after milking.
.......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
36
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
LPS method of milk preservation
Use of LPS costs between KSh1.02 and KSh1.09 per litre, which suggests that it could be economically substituted for a 
small-scale underutilised cooler which costs about KSh1.8 per litre. However, a few obstacles could prevent the use of LPS to 
preserve evening milk. These include fear by women that they could lose control of especially evening milk to their husbands 
as a result of heightened marketing possibilities for all milk. Moreover, preference by some farmers to sell to informal milk 
market agents due to low prices and delayed payment by processors may also preclude the need for LPS. It was, however, 
found that strategic application of LPS on morning milk to prevent spoilage when collection or delivery to the processors 
is delayed enhanced profitability. The private milk collection agents who, prior to these trials, routinely added hydrogen 
peroxide to their milk to prevent spoilage felt that LPS was better because it retained milk’s natural taste and smell, and 
was not harmful. However, they were concerned that the cost of LPS could be higher relative to that of hydrogen peroxide. 
However, as has been shown, LPS cost compares favourably with chilling and could be even cheaper if procured in bulk from 
the international market.
Conclusions and recommendations
We conclude that cooling may not always be a solution to problems of milk spoilage and wastage due to lack of economies 
of scale or lack/interruption and cost of electricity. In addition, there are no premiums paid for chilled milk in the Kenyan 
market – thus removing a potential incentive for cooling. As a result, it could be more beneficial for some groups of farmers 
to use LPS. However, the prospects for use of LPS to aid dairy farmers realize higher profits through preservation and sale 
of especially evening milk is limited by low productivity of animals during the dry season, lack of milk market during the 
flush season and milk marketing problems in the formal dairy sector, such as delayed payment and low milk producer prices. 
Gender issues should be considered in promotion of the LPS technology since its adoption may lead to a shift in the control 
of benefits from milk sales from women to men – men traditionally control proceeds of formal marketing in agricultural 
households. Since LPS seems to be more preferable to other illegal chemicals, there is need to strive to review its legal status 
in Kenya. Legalization will lower its cost by making it broadly available. In addition the prohibition of LPS use in milk and 
milk products intended for international trade should be reviewed to foster its use and acceptability by stakeholders who 
participate in both local and international trade in milk and milk products.
37
Targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: A guide for development planners, researchers and extension workers. 
Income and employment generation in the dairy sector 
Employment and income effects at the farm-level
Poverty-reduction and employment generation are important goals in various development strategies and policies in Kenya, 
including the recent Economic Recovery Strategy for Wealth and Employment Creation (ERSWEC 2003) and the Strategy 
for Revitalization of Agriculture (SRA 2004). In these policy documents, it is recognised that dairy activities generate many 
employment opportunities in the course of milk production, processing and marketing. 
There are an estimated 1.8 million dairy farm households in Kenya (SDP 2005), which are heavily dependent on family 
labour. Dairy production is an important source of self-employment, especially for rural households. A significant proportion 
of dairy operators also hire long-term or casual labour, which creates employment among some of the poorest segments of 
society, including landless households. Because most dairy activities occur within mixed crop-livestock production systems, 
it is not easy to attribute full-time engagement of farm households to dairy activities alone. However, it is estimated that 
Source: SDP surveys, 1997-2000. 
These are based on detailed random structured surveys of over 3000 households in highland Kenya.
Dairy farming generates an average annual return to labour per enterprise of between KSh 38,000 (US$ 475) and 102,000 
(US$ 1,275) for small-to medium-scale farmers and KSh 482,000 (US$ 6,025) to large-scale farmers, with an average 
weighted annual return of KSh 114,000 (US$ 1,425) (Table 4). Compared to an average per capita GDP of approximately 
KSh 27,825 (US$ 347) for Kenya (World Bank, 2003), dairying provides consistently higher returns than those available 
through rural wage labour.
Dairying is estimated to engage more than one-third of dairy farmers on a full-time basis, which translates into some 600,000 
self-employed persons. Small- and medium-scale dairy enterprises account for most (87 %) of the employment that is 
attributed to dairying at the farm-level, largely because of their dominance in the dairy industry in the country.
Significantly, dairy farmers also engage full-time (permanent) hired labour for dairy production activities, and also occasionally 
hire casual labour. Hired farm labour for dairy is estimated to represent about 585,000 workers full-time country-wide or 
close to a quarter of the total agricultural labour force of some 2.5 million (Table 5). In total, some 841,000 people, 34% of 
the total agricultural labour force, are directly employed in dairy production at the farm level. 

Source: SDP dairy farm data, and JICA 2003 for total agricultural labour figures
Income and employment effects at milk market level
Approximately 6 million litres of milk are traded daily in Kenya through both formal and informal small-scale and large-scale 
processors and traders. Beyond the farm-level, processing and marketing of milk and other dairy products offer numerous 
other employment and income earning opportunities for the various participants in the milk supply chain. These include 
transporters, mobile milk traders, milk bars and shops/kiosks, small processors, service providers such as vehicle repairs, 
security firms and catering outlets. Mobile milk traders do not have fixed business premises. Milk collection from producers 
is mainly on foot, by bicycle or public transport.
Most small-scale traders handle some 50-120 litres of raw milk daily. Traders with milk bars have fixed premises and mainly 
sell both un-pasteurised and fermented liquid milk. Besides family labour, paid employees are actively involved in running 
the milk bars. 
Small processors in Kenya mostly process and sell pasteurised milk, either as wholesalers and/or retailers, with a small proportion 
of milk devoted to yoghurt and cheese production. They are much fewer in proportion to other cadres of milk traders.

Labour requirements in small-scale milk marketing activities include milk collection, transportation, processing and sale, 
creating direct and indirect employment. Direct employees are those who are occupied with milk marketing and processing on a daily basis and include the farmer, his/her family and paid labour.  
Indirect employees are those involved in providing services to the dairy industry, e.g. feed providers or artisans repairing farm equipment, bicycles, etc. The overall number of both direct and 
indirect jobs created in the marketing segment of the supply chain varied from 14 to 20 for every 1,000 litres traded on a daily basis, depending on type and scale of enterprise (Table 6). This suggests that a significant number of jobs are created considering the volume of milk that is traded via various intermediaries daily.
On average, informal milk marketing generates 18 jobs for every 1,000 litres of milk that is handled daily; this includes 15 direct job opportunities and three indirect jobs. 
The formal sector generates less employment per 1,000 litres of milk handled on a daily basis (total of 15) with 14 direct jobs and one indirect job. Scaling out the employment effects to cover the whole country, formal milk processing and marketing generates about 19, 000 jobs compared to the informal marketing that creates more than 41,000 employment opportunities to yield a gross total of about 60,000 jobs.
Further, these are relatively well remunerated jobs. From this study, it is estimated that formal employment in milk processing and marketing provides an average monthly wage of KSh 11, 936 ($150) while informal market agents earn an average of KSh 8,992 ($125), both much higher than the Government’s minimum wage guideline of $43.39


What is the projected growth in milk consumption demand for Kenya by 2030: The projected growth in milk consumption demand for Kenya by 2030 involved doubling the present per capita milk consumption to 220 liters, resulting in a total milk demand of 12.76 billion liters.

What are some of the opportunities identified in the dairy value chain: Some of the opportunities identified in the dairy value chain include a large population with a strong tradition for dairy production and consumption, increasing investment in feed processing, established veterinary and breeding services delivery, expanding financial services, and a liberalized milk market.

What are some of the challenges faced in exploiting opportunities in the dairy value chain: Some of the challenges faced in exploiting opportunities in the dairy value chain include low market orientation in milk production and trade, low uptake of productivity and market-led innovations, inadequate knowledge and communication systems, heavy dependence on donor funding for research, weak research linkages with extension and farmers, and limited facilities for collecting quality milk.

What is the overview of dairy farming in Kenya: Kenya has a significant small-scale dairy farming sector, with over one million farmers contributing to 70% of the 3.5 million dairy cattle, resulting in an annual production of 4.2 billion liters of milk.

What is the economic impact of dairy farming in Kenya: Dairy farming in Kenya generates over one hundred billion shillings annually from milk sales, providing employment opportunities for over 350,000 people at the farm level and additional employment in the informal and formal marketing sector.

What are the characteristics of the Friesian breed: The Friesian is a large breed with a black and white coat, high milk production potential (40-60 liters/day), but is a heavy feeder.

What are the characteristics of the Ayrshire breed: The Ayrshire is a large breed with brown and white patches, high milk production potential (30 liters/day), and is adaptable to varied climatic zones.

What are the challenges in dairy farming in Kenya: Despite good quality exotic cows, low milk production is attributed to poor management, inadequate feeding, poor health management, and long calving intervals. Common production systems include zero-grazing, semi-zero-grazing, and open-range systems.

Why is proper calf rearing important in dairy farming: Proper calf rearing is crucial for the future dairy herd, ensuring lower mortality rates, early production, and rapid genetic improvement.

What is the importance of proper calf rearing in dairy farming: The calf is the foundation of the future dairy herd, emphasizing the importance of proper calf rearing. A good feeding and management program result in lower mortality rates, early production, and fast growth, contributing to rapid genetic improvement.

What are the signs of imminent parturition (calving) in dairy farming: Before calving, signs include the udder filling with milk, turgid and swollen vulva, and a string of mucus hanging from the vagina. Insemination records can also help estimate the expected calving date.

What are the phases of calf feeding in dairy farming: Calf feeding involves several phases. The aim is to switch young calves to cheaper feeds early, ensuring health and growth. Factors considered in calf feeding programs include low immunity at birth, dependence on milk for nutrition, and the introduction of solid feed for rumen development.

What are the methods of feeding calves in dairy farming: Calves can be fed through various methods, including single suckling, foster mother or multiple suckling, nipple suckling, bottle feeding, and bucket feeding. Each method has its advantages and disadvantages, with bucket feeding being the most commonly used.

Why is early weaning important in calf rearing: Early weaning, done gradually, helps reduce the milk feeding period and labor requirements. Specific feeding programs, including low levels of milk and high-energy, high-protein concentrates, stimulate rumen development, allowing calves to become fully dependent on other feeds.

What are the methods of castration in dairy farming: Castration can be done using methods such as knife castration, elastrator rings, and the burdizzo. Each method has its considerations, with knife castration being completely safe but requiring caution to prevent infection.

Why is dehorning performed in dairy farming: Dehorning is done to improve safety for those working with cows and prevent damage to hides. Various methods, including hot iron, surgical methods, and ear notching, are employed for dehorning in dairy farming.

How is identification of calves done in dairy farming: Calves are identified through methods such as branding, ear notching, ear tattooing, and ear tagging. Each method has its advantages and disadvantages, and identification is crucial for efficient and proper recording.

What are some common health problems associated with calf management in dairy farming: Common health problems in calves, such as scours (diarrhea) and pneumonia, are often linked to poor management practices. Diligent feeding, housing, and hygiene practices are essential to maintain calf health.

What is the starting point for raising dairy heifers: Raising dairy heifers begins with the choice of a bull likely to produce animals with high genetic potential for milk.

What are the goals of raising a high number of replacement heifers: The goals of raising a high number of replacement heifers include obtaining the best replacement heifers through strict selection criteria, expanding the dairy herd at a low cost, and selling excess heifers to earn income.

Why are heifers considered the future of the herd: Heifers represent the future of the herd as potential milk producers, although they are non-productive animals incurring expenditure without immediate returns.

What should be ensured for proper growth rate in heifer rearing: The goal in heifer rearing is to ensure proper growth rate at minimum costs to be inseminated on time for full lactation potential later in life.

Why is feeding heifers important, and what are the aims when feeding heifers: Feeding heifers is important to reach the desired body weight early, aiming to reduce the interval between weaning and first lactation, minimize mortality, achieve a growth rate of 0.5-0.7 kg/d, and achieve first calving at 22 to 24 months of age.

What are the advantages of combining adequate development and early age at calving in heifer rearing: Combining both adequate development and early age at calving has several advantages, including decreasing the risk of calving difficulty, improving lifetime milk production, reducing rearing costs, and decreasing the total number of heifers needed to maintain herd size.

Why are heifers often neglected in terms of feeding: Heifers are often neglected in terms of feeding, resulting in delayed calving.

How can heifers be reared on good quality pasture, and what should be considered in their feeding program: Heifers can be reared on good quality pasture with supplementation of concentrate at 1% of body weight. The feeding program should consider factors like puberty (calving) related to size, avoiding overfeeding or underfeeding, and monitoring performance through body weight change and height at withers.

Why is monitoring the body weight change and height at withers important in heifer rearing: Monitoring body weight change and height at withers is important to evaluate heifer growth and ensure that feeding and other management practices are adequate.

At what weight is puberty reached in heifers, and when is breeding recommended: Puberty is reached when a heifer weighs approximately 40% of her mature body weight, and breeding is recommended when a heifer has reached 60% of her expected mature body weight, typically achieved at 14 to 16 months old.

What are the considerations for steaming up pregnant heifers: For steaming up pregnant heifers, feeding should be adequate to ensure proper development, and concentrates should be given if forage quality is low.

How should housing be considered for heifers, and what factors need to be taken into account: Housing for heifers should consider factors like convenience of feeding, cleanliness of the sleeping area, and convenience of moving and restraining animals. From weaning to five months, heifers may be housed in small groups, and from the sixth month, they can be kept in paddocks in pastures with regular monitoring.

How can feeding regime affect milk production during the last two months of pregnancy: The feeding regime can affect milk production during the last two months of pregnancy. Feeding concentrates at 1 percent of body weight starting about 6 weeks before calving, with a balanced ration, is recommended.

Why is feeding concentrates important during early lactation, and how should it be done practically: Feeding concentrates during early lactation is important to allow rumen bacteria to get used to digesting high levels of concentrate. If practical, concentrates should be fed in a milking parlour to accustom the heifer to the milking parlour.

What factors need to be considered in health management for raising heifers: Health management for raising heifers is crucial, affecting growth rate, fertility, age at first calving, and milk production. Considerations include preventing common diseases affecting calves, minimizing veterinary costs and death, and limiting losses for the selection of high-quality animals or sales.

What are the key considerations for clean milk production and milking procedures in a dairy farm: Ensure the cow to be milked is healthy. Maintain a well-balanced diet for the cow with a mix of forage and concentrates. Vaccinate animals against diseases like brucellosis. Regularly check animals for contagious diseases and treat promptly. Follow proper milking procedures, including having a healthy and clean milker, using clean utensils, and maintaining hygiene in the milking shed.

How can shade provision be achieved in tropical and subtropical climates for dairy cattle: Dairy cattle in tropical and subtropical climates can be provided with shade by ensuring that the area is paved with good quality concrete, with a minimum of 2.5 to 3m per animal. The roof should be a minimum of 3m high to allow air movement. If financially feasible, all the areas that will be shaded some time during the day should be paved with good quality concrete.

What are the housing requirements for dairy cattle to be more efficient in milk production and reproduction: Dairy cattle will be more efficient in the production of milk and in reproduction if they are protected from extreme heat and direct sunshine. This can be achieved through provision of shade in tropical and subtropical climates. If dairy cattle are confined, the area should be free of mud and manure in order to reduce hoof infection to a minimum. Concrete floors or pavements are ideal where the area allows 2.5 to 3m per animal, which will give the minimum desirable protection for cattle, whether it be for one animal belonging to a small holder or many animals in a commercial herd. The roof should be a minimum of 3m high to allow air movement.

What are the considerations for shade provision with east-west orientation: With the east-west orientation, the feed and water troughs can be under the shade, allowing the cows to eat and drink in shade at any time of the day. The shaded area, however, should be in the range of 2.5 to 3m² per cow.

What are the considerations for shade provision with north-south orientation: With the north-south orientation, a shaded area of 2.5 to 3m² per cow is adequate if feed and water troughs are placed away from the shaded area. In regions where temperatures average 30°C or more for up to five hours per day during some period of the year, the east-west orientation is most beneficial.

What are the considerations for loose housing with free stalls for dairy cattle: Loose housing with free stalls for dairy cattle requires a non-slippery floor material, such as soil, to provide a good foothold during rising and lying down movements to avoid injury. Additionally, a 100mm ledge at the back edge of the free stall will prevent any bedding from being pulled out to the alley. The number of stalls should ordinarily correspond with the number of animals housed, except that in large herds (80 or more), only about 90% of the animals need to be accommodated.

Why is record keeping important in dairy farming: Record keeping is important in dairy farming for several reasons, including making management decisions, financial accounting, identifying problems, planning for the future, and determining whether targets are met. It also helps in maintaining pedigree and health records of the animals, tracking heat periods, breeding, and pregnancy checks, which are crucial for the successful operation of a dairy enterprise.

What types of records should be kept by dairy farmers for successful operation of a dairy enterprise: Dairy farmers should keep records such as pedigree and numbers of each animal, dates of heat periods, breeding, pregnancy checks, and bulls used. They should also maintain records of daily milk yield, cow identification and health, breeding/reproduction, and any incidents of fights and bites among the animals. Additionally, they should keep records of treatments for wounds and fractures, as well as disposal of waste and carcasses.

How can shade provision be achieved in tropical and subtropical climates for dairy cattle: Shade provision in tropical and subtropical climates for dairy cattle can be achieved by ensuring that the area is paved with good quality concrete, with a minimum of 2.5 to 3m per animal. The roof should be a minimum of 3m high to allow air movement. If financially feasible, all the areas that will be shaded some time during the day should be paved with good quality concrete.

What are the housing requirements for dairy cattle to be more efficient in milk production and reproduction: Dairy cattle will be more efficient in the production of milk and in reproduction if they are protected from extreme heat and direct sunshine. This can be achieved through provision of shade in tropical and subtropical climates. If dairy cattle are confined, the area should be free of mud and manure in order to reduce hoof infection to a minimum. Concrete floors or pavements are ideal where the area allows 2.5 to 3m per animal, which will give the minimum desirable protection for cattle, whether it be for one animal belonging to a small holder or many animals in a commercial herd. The roof should be a minimum of 3m high to allow air movement.

What are the considerations for shade provision with east-west orientation: With the east-west orientation, the feed and water troughs can be under the shade, allowing the cows to eat and drink in shade at any time of the day. The shaded area, however, should be in the range of 2.5 to 3m² per cow.

What are the considerations for shade provision with north-south orientation: With the north-south orientation, a shaded area of 2.5 to 3m² per cow is adequate if feed and water troughs are placed away from the shaded area. In regions where temperatures average 30°C or more for up to five hours per day during some period of the year, the east-west orientation is most beneficial.

What actions are outlined to expand domestic milk consumption and who is responsible for their implementation: The actions outlined to expand domestic milk consumption include running promotional milk consumption campaigns, popularizing the use of low-cost packages and pouches for packaging pasteurized milk, diversifying product range, and advocating for the inclusion of milk supply in public and non-governmental organization (NGO) food security programs in vulnerable areas through public-private partnership contractual arrangements. The responsibilities for their implementation are assigned to the Ministry of Cooperative Development (MoCD), Ministry of Livestock Development (MoLD), Kenya Dairy Board (KDB), farmer groups, cooperatives, NGOs, and processors.

What actions are outlined to export more milk and milk products in the regional and global markets and who is responsible for their implementation: The actions outlined to export more milk and milk products in the regional and global markets include expanding milk processing capacities in low market access high milk producing areas, re-orienting milk processing towards long life and high value dairy products, engaging in high-level policy negotiations to open regional markets for Kenyan milk and milk products, launching regular mandatory training on Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) for small and large-scale processors, milk collection, and transportation providers, and popularizing code of hygienic practice in milk production, handling, and distribution, industry regulatory services, milk, and milk products standards. The responsibilities for their implementation are assigned to the Ministry of Cooperative Development (MoCD), Ministry of Livestock Development (MoLD), Kenya Dairy Board (KDB), farmer groups, cooperatives, and NGOs.

How can shade provision be achieved in tropical and subtropical climates for dairy cattle: Shade provision in tropical and subtropical climates for dairy cattle can be achieved by planting trees in and around the grazing areas, constructing shade structures such as open-sided sheds or shade cloth shelters, and providing access to water for cooling.

What actions can be taken to improve security and encourage investments in the dairy industry in Kenya: To improve security and encourage investments in the dairy industry in Kenya, actions such as investing in rural infrastructure, building police posts in areas with high insecurity, and popularizing community policing can be taken.

How can gender sensitivity be mainstreamed in the dairy value chain support: Gender sensitivity can be mainstreamed in the dairy value chain support through the development of gender-sensitive extension approaches, financial services, and technologies, as well as by engaging in gender-sensitive training and outreach programs.

What measures can be implemented to enhance mitigation and adaptation to climate change variability and change in the dairy industry: Measures to enhance mitigation and adaptation to climate change variability and change in the dairy industry include developing regional information sheets on climate change, conducting vulnerability and adaptation assessments, and promoting the uptake of low-energy use technologies and mixed dairy-crop production systems.

How can milk producers improve water use efficiency in milk production: Milk producers can improve water use efficiency in milk production by providing training on water harvesting, storage, and conservation, promoting water use efficiency in drinking and service in the dairy value chain, and sensitizing farmers on water requirements for animals to maximize productivity.

What research and development activities were carried out by the Smallholder Dairy Project (SDP) in Kenya: The Smallholder Dairy Project (SDP) carried out research and development activities to support sustainable improvements to the livelihoods of poor Kenyans through their participation in the dairy sub-sector. SDP was jointly implemented by the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries Development (MoLFD), the Kenya Agricultural Research Institute (KARI), and the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI).

Who led the Smallholder Dairy Project (SDP) in Kenya and what were the main constraints affecting smallholder dairy farmers: The Smallholder Dairy Project (SDP) was led by the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries Development (MoLFD). The main constraints affecting smallholder dairy farmers included farm constraints, market and infrastructure, and information services.

What were the objectives of the Kenya Dairy Development Program (KDDP) and who were the implementing partners: The Kenya Dairy Development Program (KDDP) aimed to support smallholder dairy farmers, market agents, stakeholders, and policy-makers. It was implemented by Land O’Lakes in partnership with African Breeders Service Total Cattle Management, International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), and others.

What is targeting of interventions: Targeting of interventions involves the systematic identification of domains where the probability of adoption is high and where promotional efforts can most effectively be focused. Targeting can be based on various criteria such as geographical location, population density, rainfall, elevation, and cattle density, among others, to determine the 'best fit' domain for adoption of the particular technology.

How are GIS layers used in targeting dairy interventions in Kenya: GIS layers are used in targeting dairy interventions in Kenya by combining layers of information about a place to provide a better understanding of that place. These layers include information about market access, demographics, agro-climatic conditions, cattle densities, and more. By superimposing one layer on another, GIS analysis combines the information of the two layers, providing multiple information sets that can help predict where the probability of adoption is highest for different dairy interventions.

How does human population density influence the adoption of dairy interventions in Kenya: Human population density influences the adoption of dairy interventions in Kenya by indicating centres of high milk consumption where producers are likely to be able to sell their milk production locally. Additionally, population pressure is seen as a key driving factor for the uptake of productivity-enhancing interventions, as high demand motivates farmers to increase their productivity.

How does agro-climatic potential influence the adoption of dairy interventions in Kenya: Agro-climatic potential influences the adoption of dairy interventions in Kenya by indicating the suitability of an area for keeping dairy cattle. For example, in the Kenyan Highlands, higher potential for keeping dairy cattle is associated with higher precipitation over potential evapo-transpiration (PPE), which provides good conditions for growing forage, a key input in dairy production.

What factors were used to predict the probability of adoption of improved dairy cattle in Kenya: Factors used to predict the probability of adoption of improved dairy cattle in Kenya included agro-climatic potential, total distance to Nairobi, and cattle densities associated with adoption. These factors were derived from statistical analysis of survey and other spatial data.

What does the predicted probability map of adoption of zero-grazing in Kenya indicate: The predicted probability map of adoption of zero-grazing in Kenya indicates that adoption of zero-grazing is largely driven by the density of human population, suggesting that adoption of zero-grazing technology is a reaction to growing population pressure. It also shows that favorable climates, evidenced by higher precipitation, lead to higher adoption of zero-grazing.

What are the main factors influencing the response to concentrate feeding in dairy cattle in Kenya: The main factors influencing the response to concentrate feeding in dairy cattle in Kenya include genetic potential for milk production, stage of lactation, feeding level in relation to milk production, heat stress, pasture availability and nutrient content, substitution rate of the concentrate for pasture, and quality of concentrates.

How does agro-climatic potential influence the adoption of dairy interventions in Kenya: Agro-climatic potential influences the adoption of dairy interventions in Kenya by indicating the likelihood of adoption based on factors such as favorable climates, good market access, and the experience/exposure of the dairy farmer.

Why are forage legumes important in smallholder farming systems in Kenya: Forage legumes are important in smallholder farming systems in Kenya because they are high in protein, can improve soil fertility by fixing atmospheric nitrogen, and can be used to supplement diets based on low-protein basal forages.

What are the criteria for predicting the likelihood of adoption of Desmodium and Calliandra in Kenya: The criteria for predicting the likelihood of adoption of Desmodium and Calliandra in Kenya include rainfall greater than 900mm per year, elevation between 250 and 750 meters above sea-level, human population density greater than 250 persons per km2, and improved cattle density greater than 50 cattle per km2.

What are the factors influencing the adoption of artificial insemination (AI) technology in dairy farming in Kenya: The factors influencing the adoption of artificial insemination (AI) technology in dairy farming in Kenya include historical non-use, cultural biases, human population density, and regional differences in adoption despite favorable indicators such as cattle numbers and agro-climatic potential.

What are the main functions of dairy cooperatives in Kenya and where should they be located for maximum impact: The main functions of dairy cooperatives in Kenya include procuring, bulking, standardizing, and marketing milk, as well as providing extension services such as breeding and animal health services. They should be located where dairy cattle and human population density is high, and where there is either very close or far away access to major consumption centers.

What are the criteria for predicting the likelihood of adoption of dairy cooperatives in Kenya: The criteria for predicting the likelihood of adoption of dairy cooperatives in Kenya include the distance to major consumption centers, milk surplus in an area, and the necessity for marketing cooperatives due to surplus milk production. Additionally, the effectiveness and efficiency of marketing milk, increased bargaining power, and the pooling of economic resources are important factors.

What do the dark brown and light brown areas represent in the combined recommendation domains for targeting dairy cooperative development in Kenya: The dark brown areas represent regions where dairy cooperatives are most needed due to low market access and surplus milk production, indicating a higher likelihood of farmers using collective marketing arrangements. The light brown areas combine high market access with high milk surplus, suggesting that farmers in these areas could still be in cooperatives but also have other alternatives due to greater market access.

What were the strategic goals for the Dairy Master Plan: The strategic goals for the Dairy Master Plan included aligning dairy development programs and strategies with new development aspirations, responding to emerging challenges in the dairy sub-sector, formulating relevant strategies and programs for dairy industry development, providing a roadmap for public-private partnerships, producing a pragmatic framework for implementing interventions, and addressing cross-cutting thematic issues in dairy value chain development.

What was the process involved in the development of the Dairy Master Plan: The development of the Dairy Master Plan involved four major processes: desktop literature review study, ground-truthing field survey, synthesis of information and scenario analyses, and consultation with stakeholders in the dairy value chain.

How does the transformation of the Kenyan dairy industry compare to other countries: The transformation of the Kenyan dairy industry can be benchmarked against dairy industries in China, India, and Australia. These countries share similarities with Kenya in terms of low-cost, rainfed pasture dairy production systems, dominance of smallholders in the dairy sub-sector, and dairy consumption as an integral part of farming systems.

What was the projected growth in milk consumption demand for Kenya by 2030: The projected growth in milk consumption demand for Kenya by 2030 involved doubling the present per capita milk consumption to 220 liters, resulting in a total milk demand of 12.76 billion liters.

What are some of the opportunities identified in the dairy value chain: Some of the opportunities identified in the dairy value chain include a large population with a strong tradition for dairy production and consumption, increasing investment in feed processing, established veterinary and breeding services delivery, expanding financial services, and a liberalized milk market.

What are some of the challenges faced in exploiting opportunities in the dairy value chain: Some of the challenges faced in exploiting opportunities in the dairy value chain include low market orientation in milk production and trade, low uptake of productivity and market-led innovations, inadequate knowledge and communication systems, heavy dependence on donor funding for research, weak research linkages with extension and farmers, and limited facilities for collecting quality milk.


